 This is BIO 150, isn't it?
OK, just wanted to make sure.
So we start off with a scenario.
40-year-old guy-- quiet, suburban life.
Married 15 years, two kids, 3.5 dogs.
Everything's standard.
Everything's going wonderfully.
And one day out of nowhere, he punches somebody
in the face at work.
Totally bizarre, out of character.
The guy is standing there by the water cooler
and makes some comment on some baseball team,
takes exception to it, punches him in the face.
Utterly strange.
Things are quiet.
Three months later, his wife of 15 years happy marriage
discovers he's having an affair with a 16-year-old checkout
kid down at the Safeway.
Really weird.
Then three months after that, he absconds
with all the money at work, embezzles it, disappears,
and is never seen again.
Three possibilities.
First one-- this guy is a truly deep creep.
Second, he is having the most immature midlife
crisis you could ever imagine.
Third possibility-- he has a mutation
in one gene in his head.
And what we will be seeing is this
is exactly the profile that you get
in a certain neurological disease
where it's one gene that's out of whack.
First demonstration of that.
OK, just to get a sense of who's here,
how many of you think there is a genetic influence
on sexual orientation?
OK, how many think it is possible for prenatal events
to influence your political opinions 30 years later?
OK, how many think that there is a valid way of using biology
to understand who's religious and who isn't?
Not quite as many hands there.
OK, as long as we're in that terrain,
how many people believe in God?
How many people believe in souls?
How many people believe in evil?
How many people believe in free will?
That's going to change.
[LAUGHTER]
Oh, I might as well ask.
Is there anybody in this room who actually
does believe in evolution?
Just wanted to make sure.
See what we're dealing with here.
OK, how many think that there is a genetic influence
and that there is a basic biological difference, sex
difference, in levels of aggression?
How many think there's biological basis of sex
differences in intelligence?
OK, who thinks it's all explained by nature?
Who thinks it's all explained by nurture?
Who thinks there's a magnificent, fascinating,
nuanced interaction between nature and nurture?
[LAUGHTER]
Yay.
OK, well everybody's going to get an A+ then.
You already have the course under control.
So we start off trying to find something in common.
Look at these four events here-- or not,
in terms of being scraped out there.
But these are four circumstances that have
something surprising in common.
Having your period.
Having a brain tumor.
Eating a lot of junk food.
Taking anabolic steroids.
Those of you who are not oriented
to with, that's the ones that build up your muscles
like testosterone derivatives.
OK, these all have something in common-- having your period,
having a brain tumor, eating a lot of junk food,
and taking a lot of anabolic steroids.
Anybody want to fathom a guess what's the commonality
amongst the four of them?
Yeah.
Hormones?
Hormones.
Good.
OK, we're off and running with hormones.
Good.
Even more specific than that.
Something they all have in common.
Oh, come on, somebody want to guess?
I see these brief movements of hands
there as people change their mind.
OK, it all has to do with hormones.
They all have hormones in common,
I say, trying to facilitate somebody making the next guess.
Oh, come on.
They all have something.
OK, we gotta get outta here at some point.
These all have four things in common.
All of these have been used successfully in courts of law
to explain the behavior of a murderer.
[LAUGHTER]
In the first case, a number of cases
where the fact that a woman was having
her period at the time of killing someone
was part of what a jury said led them to exonerate the person.
A literature showing that a disproportionate share
of female aggression comes around the time of menses.
Next one-- there is an area of the brain you will know so much
about over the next three months called the amygdala
that has something to do with aggression
and has something to do with fear.
And you get a brain tumor there, and in a number of cases,
you get someone who is uncontrollably violent.
And this has also been used successfully in a court of law.
Junk food-- any of you who are San Francisco history buffs
will know 20 years ago, 30 years ago
that Dan White, a disappointed office seeker,
assassinated the mayor of San Francisco along with Harvey
Milk.
And as part of his remarkably successful defense
for a double murderer that led to a remarkably short jail
sentence, was the famed Twinkie defense.
The argument that his addiction to junk food
caused wild fluctuations in his blood sugar levels,
which caused him to do that.
Finally, anabolic steroids.
Any number of cases of people having uncontrolled violence
arguing because they were weight lifters and a wildly
abusive range of taking this stuff
had something to do with violence.
Put all four of these together, and we
get the first of the two points of this entire course.
Which is, sometimes the stuff that's going on in your body
can dramatically influence what goes on in your brain.
Second critical point-- tonight, when you've settled back down,
and you're ready to go to sleep, and you're nice and relaxed,
and your heart's beating nice and slow,
think the following thought.
You know, that heart isn't going to beat forever.
Think about your lips turning blue after.
Think about the blood flow slowing down.
Think about your feet and your toes getting cold.
And at that point, you will probably
be increasing the rate at which that heart beats.
And you will have just seen the second key thing
in this course, which is sometimes
what's going on in your head will
affect every single outpost in your body.
And what this course is about is the intertwining,
the interconnections between your physiology
and your behavior-- the underlying emotions,
thoughts, memories, all of that, and the capacity of each
to deeply influence the other under all sorts
of circumstances.
Now, what we're going to be doing with this
is trying to understand this under fairly
difficult circumstances.
If everybody here was here because they really
wanted to understand why all the wildebeest on earth
mate in the same week each year, we'd
have a fighting chance of figuring that one out.
But that's not what we want to understand.
We don't want to understand why birds
migrate and don't get lost.
We want to understand human behavior.
Worse than that, harder than that, human social behavior.
And hardest of all in some cases, some grossly abnormal
human behavior.
And if you're going to try to do that, there
is a problem which is, officially, it's complicated.
It is a huge, messy process trying
to make sense of the biology of human social behavior.
And just as all sorts of realms when
one deals with messy, complicated problems
that you need to think about in some wildly interacting way,
we all have a strategy that we come up with.
A strategy to make things easier-- which
is that we think in categories.
We think in categories.
We take things that are continua,
and we break them into categories.
And we label those categories.
And we do that in various settings
because it could be extremely useful.
For example, somebody give me an estimate on how long
this line is.
[INAUDIBLE]
A foot.
OK, people who said a foot, what is it that
went through your head to figure it out?
You imagined how long a ruler is.
Is this 11.5 inches because and it's 11 inches-- an 8.5 by 11.
But everybody in here has this category in their head things
that are kind of the same length as a ruler.
A continua of lengths, and there's a category for that.
Suppose I'm telling you I have some friend who's a runner.
He runs the mile.
He's incredibly fast.
In fact, he's one of the best runners
in the country at this point.
How fast does he have to have run the mile or better for you
to be deeply impressed?
Under four minutes.
And thus, we have another categorical boundary
there of there's an infinite variety of speeds
with which you can run a mile.
Yet we have in our heads this boundary-- people
who are under four minute milers,
you are very impressed with.
OK, now I want to impress you with another friend of mine
who's a painter.
And this person is such a great painter
that they paint with 11 different colors.
That doesn't work because that's not a category that we have.
We don't classify the quality-- hopefully
not-- we don't classify quality of paintings along those lines.
But we begin to see here is in the right areas,
we have categories that we impose on things
that are not categorical.
Here's an example.
Why should you do this?
Where'd the example go?
Here's one of the classic continua
that we ever deal with, which is the continua of color--
the varying wavelengths that take the rainbow from violet
to red.
And there's an infinite number of spaces in between.
And what do we do?
We have rules in English that you can divide the continua
here and here, or whatever, and that's what you call a color.
This is red.
Everything from here is red.
Everything here is orange, so on.
You take a continua, and you break it into boundaries.
Why do we do that?
Because it makes it easier to store the information away.
Instead of remembering the absolute features of something,
you simply say, it's a.
It's a sub-four minute miler.
It's a line that's about the length of a ruler.
It's the color orange.
How do you know that's the case?
Because go and take people from other language groups,
where their language arbitrarily divides the rainbow
at other points with completely different color terms,
and they remember different profiles of colors differently
than an English speaker might.
Take a color.
And if the color comes right in the center of somebody's color
characterization, if it comes right
in the middle of the range of what counts as that color,
people remember whether they saw that color or not far better
than if you show them a color at the boundary.
And people will show that as a function of what language
they speak.
Taking a continua, and you break it into pieces,
because it's easier to deal with the facts.
Another example of it.
Here we have four objects.
And as drawn here, simply because we have categories
to describe the first three, do one
of those tests of show people a bunch of shapes,
and they come back an hour later and ask them,
Have you seen this shape before?
And people are going to be far more accurate with this
than whether they saw this or not because we
don't have a word for it.
We don't have a word that's at all sort of analytical
that some squiggly whatever.
We don't have a clear cut category.
Thinking in categories makes it easier
for us to remember stuff.
And it makes it easier for us to evaluate stuff.
So that's a classic sort of response
that we have cognitively to complicated things.
But there's a bunch of problems with categorical thinking.
First example-- and first one you
can see from a realm of language differences--
in that not only is there a continua of infinite number
of wavelengths, there is a continua of sounds
that humans can make.
And different languages draw boundaries at different points
as to what count as similar sounds or different sounds.
There's like two different T-H sounds in English,
which apparently we're not very good at hearing.
But there's other ones we are.
And that will affect your ability
to remember stuff-- what word it was-- depending on
whether it is on a dramatically different boundary, whether it
is a sound that sounds different to you or not.
Example of this-- apparently in Finnish, people
do not differentiate between the sound of a B
and the sound of a P, whereas we have no trouble with that.
But people from Finland do not make that differentiation.
And I discovered this one day a number of years
ago where, for reasons I don't even understand,
I found myself needing to take to testicular biopsies
on baboons.
Not having sort of learned that in junior high how you do that,
I called up this guy at urology the med school
who happened to be Finnish.
And I explained to him what I wanted to do.
And he sort of took me through the paces
and told me what thingy I needed to buy, and that sort of stuff,
and holiday packages of those where you can get a dozen.
And sort of telling me how to do that.
And once we went through he said, What I want you to do,
the thing to do at this point, is get some practice.
I want you to practice on a bear.
[LAUGHTER]
And I said, What?
He said, Yeah.
Practice on a bear.
And I said, Are you kidding me?
He said, I know.
I know it sounds crazy, but we have all the residents do that.
It's a very good learning device.
Either practice on a bear or an apple.
Oh.
Oh.
Here we see the dangers of making mistakes
about differences between B and P under certain circumstances.
So we see one of the dangers there,
which is when you are paying too much attention to categories,
you can't differentiate two facts that
fall within the same category.
Next example.
I remember back at various points of anxiety during exams,
and such back when where there was
a world of difference between getting a 65 on a test and a 66
on a test.
Not particularly different.
But because there is this boundary drawn there
between passing and failing, there is this dramatic
differentiating we make.
When you put up boundaries, you have
trouble seeing how similar things are
on either side of it.
Next example, one additional problem
that you get when you think categorically.
And for this, everybody needs to turn
over one of the pieces of paper--
the paper you're going to hand in, the questionnaire.
And what I'm going to do is read you a series of phone numbers,
and I want you to write them down as accurately as possible.
OK, ready?
243-2649, 650-3260, 256-5779, 832-2449, 291-3171, 231-4026,
593-2449, 743-8840, 831-5287.
OK.
Now what that exercise is-- and no,
that doesn't count towards the grade.
What that will show, I'm sure, when
in some obsessive burst of procrastination
I actually look through the answers
tonight, what it's going to show is the accuracy
is going to tank the second you go from the phone number
pattern of three digits followed by four, break up that pattern.
And suddenly we all get screwed up because we're saying,
Wait a second.
I thought it was a phone number.
That was one digit.
Now two digits.
I can't.
And it's gone, and you're on to the next one.
And what we see there is the third example, which
is when you pay too much attention to boundaries,
you don't see the big picture.
All you see are categories.
All you see are, Wait a second, phone numbers
are supposed to come with three digits followed by four.
Another example where we use categorical thinking.
OK, I'm putting up a number series here.
OK.
What's-- oh, my god.
OK, what's the next number in this series?
And why?
[INAUDIBLE]
42.
How come?
[INAUDIBLE]
OK, so we're kind of oscillating all over the place there.
OK, so that's as valid as anybody else's.
Who else has a next number in line there?
[INAUDIBLE]
What's that?
[INAUDIBLE]
45.
How come?
[INAUDIBLE]
OK.
Are you going to take that?
45.
That's very-- OK.
What else?
Let me make it a little bit easier here.
OK.
So what's the next number in that series?
And what I'm telling you is if you think
about the world with a certain set of categories in your head,
you will know the next number in the sequence.
So what's the next one?
[INAUDIBLE]
Seven billion.
[INAUDIBLE]
OK.
That one.
OK.
Seven billion.
That's another possibility.
Although presumably, it would be seven billionth.
Anything else?
Any other guesses here as to what happens next?
4th, 14th, 23rd, 34th.
What's the next one in the sequence yes?
[INAUDIBLE]
44.
How come?
[INAUDIBLE]
OK.
But remember, it's got to be 44th.
What's that?
Ordinal?
Cardinal?
Whatever it is.
What?
42nd.
How come?
The subway?
You were right.
You were right.
Anybody who is a New Yorker will know what the next one is.
These are the subway stops.
And you get a bagel with cream cheese.
[APPLAUSE]
So you get New Yorkers, and while everybody else
is thinking logical things like 43, and 41, and 45,
and seven billion, and all of that,
you've got this whole world of dividing numbers by.
Subway stops.
We think in categories.
We think in categories.
But as you just saw, there are these problems.
First one being, when you think in categories,
you underestimate how different two facts are when
they fall in the same category.
When you think in categories, you
overestimate how different they are
when there happens to be a boundary in between them.
And when you pay attention to categorical boundaries,
you don't see big pictures.
Now, what our goal in this class is going to be is
think about this big, complex issue
of the biology of behavior without falling
into thinking in categories.
What do I mean in this regard?
Thinking categorically about a subject like this?
There's some chicken.
And the chicken is standing somewhere.
And there's some rooster over there
that does some sexually solicitive, exciting thing
for the female.
And in response to that, the female
picks up and goes running over to the rooster.
And thus, we have our first behavioral biology question
here.
Why did that chicken cross the road?
To get to that rooster.
So you could answer that like an endocrinologist
and say, Well the female had certain levels of estrogen
in her bloodstream, which made this key hypothalic areas
responsive to the stimulus.
Or you could answer it like an anatomist,
saying, Well, because the fulcrum of her pelvis
or whatever it is chickens have that allow them to run.
Or you could answer it in the category
of an evolutionary biologist.
That over the millennia, chickens
that didn't respond to sexually solicitive gesture from males
left fewer copies of their genes.
And there's all these different categories
that we can use to explain what's going on.
All of these different buckets.
All of these different buckets which
begin to pull you towards all of the problems we just saw.
Now, having trouble telling how different or similar two facts
are.
Having trouble seeing big pictures.
Over emphasizing the importance of the bucket
you happen to live inside of.
And thus, suddenly everything about this behavior
is explained by a gene, a neurotransmitter, a childhood
trauma, a living inside one bucket.
Whet we are going to be doing over and over in here
as the main point of the course is looking at how what goes on
in your body influences behavior, emotions, memories.
How what goes on there influences your body,
looping over.
And at every one of those points,
resisting the pull to think categorically.
Oh, this is the explanation for where this behavior came from.
Here's what we're going to be doing instead
throughout in terms of the structure of the class
when we get to actual behaviors.
For each behavioral category, we will start off
by looking at what the behavior looks like.
Because often, that takes a lot more objectivity
than we initially assume.
What does the behavior look like?
Then we will say, Well, what went on in that organism
a half second before that behavior occurred
to cause it to occur?
Which is the world of what's going on with neurons.
What's going on with circuitry.
Where's the explanation for the behavior.
Aha.
This behavior happened because this part of the brain
got activated.
But just as we're about to settle in happily
into that bucket, we push back a bit
and say, Well, what smell, what sound,
what sensory stimulation in the environment
caused those neurons to get activated
and produce that behavior?
And then pushing one step further behind.
OK, well, what do hormone levels, various hormones
in the bloodstream of that animal or individual
for the past few hours, how do those hormones
change how sensitive you are to those sounds, smells,
et cetera, that cause those neurons
to get activated and produce the behavior?
And all we're going to be doing is working our way back,
all the way through early development, fetal life,
the genetic makeup up of an individual, the genetic makeup
up entire populations, species, the evolutionary pressure
on, all the way back to there.
How do you explain each one of these behaviors
in the context of those outposts?
And how are they not really outposts?
All they are, are different ways of expressing
the same biological influences.
If you say, Ooh, here's a hormone
that explains this behavior.
This behavior is caused by Hormone X. Hormone
X is coded for by a gene.
So suddenly you're not just talking about endocrinology.
You're talking about genetics.
And if there's a gene there, it has
been the subject to selection.
So suddenly you're talking about evolution.
If you were talking about what smells, sights, et cetera,
are the acute triggers for a behavior,
by definition you're also talking
about fetal development that determined
how sensitive those systems were to those sorts of stimuli.
What we're going to be having over and over again is
any one of these buckets that we spend some time in,
all we're going to do is think of that bucket is at that point
the most convenient way of describing
all of the influences that came beforehand.
And in that regard, there's no buckets.
All they are, are temporary platforms.
And each platform is simply the easiest, most convenient way
of describing the outcome of everything that came beforehand
starting with millennia back in evolution.
OK.
So that sounds great.
That's what we're going to do.
We're going to do this.
And we're going to be very sophisticated and fancy
in our thinking about it.
And we're not going to fall for categorical thinking.
OK, this is a complicated subject, and we're smart.
So we're going to try to think about it smartly.
That's great.
But like maybe this is just an irritating song and dance here
of, Ooh, we're not going to fall for categorical thinking
like people out there.
Obviously when people are thinking
about stuff like behavior, and they do this professionally,
professional biologists, yes, and they understand also.
This is just the strawman.
Ooh, we're going to be more sophisticated in our thinking
than endocrinologists, and geneticists, and all of those.
They obviously know that these things interact,
and there's not just one explanation.
And it's just the area they focus on.
They understand that.
Let me read you a few quotes to show
just how much some of these folks don't understand that.
First quote.
"Give me a child at birth from any background,
and let me control the total environment in which he
is raised, and I will turn him into anything
I wish him to be-- whether doctor, lawyer,
or beggar, or thief."
This was John Watson, 1912, one of the founding fathers
of the school of psychology called behaviorism.
Behaviorism-- that sort of reached its apogee
with this guy BF Skinner in the 1950s.
This notion that if you could control
the rewards, the punishments, the positive,
the negative reinforcements, you could turn anybody
into anything you want, whether doctor, lawyer, beggar,
or thief.
And we know that isn't the case.
We know that's not possible.
We know that.
All you have to do is throw in one other factor
and like a lot of protein malnutrition during fetal life,
and you're not going to be able to do that.
That being a crude example of just how wrong this guy was.
You cannot have all the control over the environment and turn
somebody into whatever you want.
Here's a guy living pathologically in this bucket
that behavior could be explained solely by understanding reward
and punishment.
Interesting factoid-- this John Watson guy.
Shortly after that, he was driven out
of academia for a wild scandal that he was involved in.
And he spent the rest of his career
apparently as an extremely successful advertising
executive.
Going to show you something-- he may not
have been able to turn people into anything
he wanted, but apparently he could
make them buy all sorts of geegaw nonsense.
OK, next quote.
"Normal psychic life depends upon the good functioning
of brain synapses."
If you don't know what synapses are, don't panic at this point.
They're ways brain cells connect with each other.
OK. "Normal psychic life depends on the good functioning
of brain synapses, and mental disorders
appear as a result of the synaptic derangements.
Synaptic adjustments will then modify the corresponding ideas
and force them into different channels.
Using this approach, we obtained cures and improvements
but no failures."
Synaptic adjustments.
What do you suppose those little old synaptic adjustments are
that this guy is referring to?
Any guesses?
[INAUDIBLE]
Somebody shout it out.
[INAUDIBLE]
Electroshock therapy.
Electroshock therapy-- you know, a little synaptic.
You wish it were as gentle as electroshock therapy.
This is even more dramatic synaptic adjustments.
Any other guesses?
[INAUDIBLE]
Yeah, frontal lobotomies.
You want to adjust somebody's synapses,
so you slice off the front third of their brain or so.
This was Egas Moniz, a Portuguese neurologist who
invented frontal lobotomies.
It had a different name at the time.
But was the person who started this,
and something that was done to tens and hundreds of thousands
of people who had absolutely nothing wrong with them.
One of the darkest chapters of where psychiatry
gets in bed with ideology.
Massive criminal destruction of people's brains.
This is what he had to say about the procedure on his acceptance
of his Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine
for having invented it.
So here we have somebody pathologically
living in a world of understand how synapses are working,
adjust them.
And with that, we obtain cures and improvements
but no failures.
Final quote.
Worst one of all.
"The selection for social utility
must be accomplished by some social institution
if mankind is not to be ruined by domestication
induced degeneracy.
The racial idea as the basis of our state
has already accomplished much in this respect.
We may, and we must, rely on the healthy instincts
of the best of our people for the extermination
of elements of the population loaded with dregs."
Anybody want to guess who that was?
[INAUDIBLE]
Hitler?
Hitler, that behavioral biologist.
He was a little bit busy at the time.
This was instead one of Hitler's main scientific propagandists.
This was somebody living pathologically in a box--
a box that doesn't even exist-- having notion of race,
and ethnicity, and genetics, and all of that,
saying let me fix that one.
Let me exterminate the elements of the population loaded
with dregs, and I'll fix up that little problem of fixing
something that ain't broken.
Who was this?
This was a scientist named Conrad Lorenz.
Conrad Lorenz, who probably a lot of us are familiar with.
Conrad Lorenz was one of the founding fathers of ethology.
We'll learn all about that.
But he, like everybody knows him winding up
in all the little kid nature books,
Conrad Lorenz discovered imprinting in birds.
And he'd be going around.
He was this little Austrian guy with this cherubic white beard.
And he'd always have these little Austrian shorts
and suspenders.
And there would be a whole bunch of duckies following him
because they thought he was mom, and he was totally
charming and irresistible.
This sort of old imprinting with his ducky kids.
And he also happened to be a rabid Nazi propagandists who
went to his grave saying that there was
nothing wrong with what he did.
These are not crappy, fourth-rate scientists.
These are not people working at the University of the Desert
of Podunk or whatever.
These are among the most influential scientists
of the last century.
These are people who influenced how people were educated,
and when we decided it wasn't worth the effort of doing it.
These are people whose influence led to the brains being
destroyed of hundreds of thousands
of people who had nothing wrong with them.
These are the people who led to the notion
that you fix up a problem that doesn't exist by exterminating
nine million people.
These are not minor scientists.
These are the most influential people
of the last century coming out of science in many ways
living pathologically inside their own buckets
and how they could explain the entire world.
And thus, again, our goal is going to not fall for that.
To think about human behaviors, and in some cases
to think about some of the most disturbed,
some of the most frightening, damaged human
behaviors, and resist the temptation
to think inside a bucket and find the explanation.
Again, every level we're going to talk about-- genes,
hormones, neurons, environmental influence, whatever it is--
that point will simply be the easiest way
of describing all of the influences that came before.
They're not even temporary buckets.
There's no buckets.
That will be our goal.
Now, in thinking about this and approaching
human behavior, the biology of human social behavior,
often the biology of abnormal human social behavior,
we're going to have three intellectual challenges.
The first one is recognizing circumstances
where there is nothing fancy about us whatsoever.
We are just like every other animal out there.
And where the challenge is to accept that.
Let me give you an example.
You are a hamster.
You are a female hamster.
And you're sitting in your cage.
And, as a female hamster, what you do
is you ovulate every five days or so.
And you're going about your business,
and everything's great.
Now, somebody puts another female hamster
in the cage with you.
And over the subsequent month or so, what happens is both of you
will begin to lengthen your cycles
and eventually synchronize them so that you are both
ovulating the same afternoon on a regular basis.
Amazing.
This actually works this way.
And menstrual ovulatory synchrony-- people
understand how this works in hamsters.
It is done with olfaction, with pheromones,
with chemical airborne signals from one female to another.
And you can prove this by electrically recording
from olfactory systems.
Or, if you don't have much funding,
you could take like a paper clip over the female hamster's nose,
and she doesn't synchronize then.
It's all done with olfaction.
And what's most amazing is you put the two females together,
and there is a way of disrupting it.
Put a male hamster in there, and suddenly the cycles
desynchronize and shorten, and you break it up
with male pheromones.
And what's even more remarkable is you put the two females
together, and it's not random who synchronizes the other one.
The dominant female synchronizes the subordinate one.
Totally understood.
People have been working on this for years.
And it works this way in goats, and sheep, and dogs, and cats,
and pigs.
Apparently, you could go to a 7-Eleven somewhere in Iowa,
and you could buy a can of pig ovulatory synchronization spray
and take it home, and just run wild.
I have no idea why you would want to do that.
But nonetheless, that's how you--
it's up there with the cans of Cheese Whiz or whatever.
And it's that well understood.
And what's remarkable is it works exactly the same way
in us humans, where it is known as the Wellesley Effect.
The fact that over the course of freshman
year, this was first shown in Wellesley, 1970.
Over the course of freshman year, women--
freshman year roommates-- tended to lengthen and synchronize
their cycles.
And it was done with olfaction.
Women who had olfactory deficits didn't synchronize
with their roommates.
They would synchronize unless they
were having close intimate relationships
with a male, in which case they desynchronized.
And what's most cruel of all is, it's not random
who synchronizes to who.
The studies tend to show is the individual who is more socially
outgoing, extroverted, dominating, is the one who
synchronizes the other one.
And this is well enough understood
that when I went in college, people
would sit around at the dinner table and say stuff like,
Oh, when we roomed together in the summer,
I had her synchronized by August 1st.
This is what happens if you hang out with biologists.
But we're exactly the same.
The challenge here is recognizing there
is nothing fancy about us.
At various points in the class, we
will look at comparisons between the human and the chimp genome,
and it's virtually the same.
Some of the time, we are just a plain old off-the-rack animal.
Second challenge is going to be circumstances where we appear
to be just like everybody else, all the other organisms
out there, but we do something very
different with the similarity.
Let me give you an example here.
You have two humans, two individuals,
who are going through a ritual.
They are sitting at a table.
They're absolutely silent.
They're making no eye contact, and they
do nothing more physically taxing than every now
and then, one of them picks up their hand
and moves a little piece of wood on the table.
And if these happen to be the right two
individuals in the middle of a chess grandmaster tournament,
these people are maintaining blood pressure
for six hours running that you only see in a marathon runner.
These people are going through thousands of calories a day
doing nothing more than thinking.
And this is outrageous.
Because you look at one of these chess
grandmasters who's just taken down an opponent
and took their queen, or whatever,
and they will have the exact same physiology
as some male baboon on the Savannah
who's just ripped the stomach open of his worst rival.
And we're doing it there just with thought.
And some of the time what's remarkable about us is we
have absolutely typical, boring physiology,
but we use it in ways that no other animal could.
We get stressed by the inevitability of our mortality.
We get stressed by reading something awful that
has happened to a child on the other side of the planet.
We get stressed by somebody zooming past us
in some sports car, and we decide that we are now
economically inadequate.
And you never even see the person's face.
You just see the car.
We get stressed reading about something awful happening
to a character in a novel.
This is a whole realm of things that we
could do that nobody else does.
And on the flip side, we can feel compassion and empathy
for a loved one.
But we can also do the same for someone
on the other side of the planet in a refugee camp.
We can feel compassion for a member of another species.
We feel badly when our pets are injured.
This is another realm where the physiology of the response--
the empathy, the emotional bonding, all of that--
it's the same boring physiology as every other animal
out there, and we are using it in a way that
is unrecognizable.
Now, some of the time the challenge
is the third category, which is when we are doing something
that no other animal out there has
anything remotely similar to.
Let me give you an example here, a shocking example.
You have a couple.
They live together.
They come back at the end of the day from work.
They talk.
They eat dinner.
They talk some more.
They go to bed, and they have sex.
They talk some more.
They fall asleep.
The next day, they do the same exact thing.
They come home from work.
They talk.
They eat.
They talk.
They go to bed.
They have sex.
They talk some more.
They do this every single night for 30 days running.
Hippos would be repulsed by this.
Because hardly anybody out there in the animal kingdom
has non-reproductive sex, let alone day after day.
And nobody else out there talks about it afterward.
And what we've got here is a whole novel domain
of human behavior-- language use, aspects of our sexuality,
this profoundly damaging human uniqueness
of some individuals confusing aspects of sexuality
with aggression.
In some cases, we are going to be out there on our own
trying to understand what's up.
OK.
So that will be the general strategy for the course.
We will resist categorical thinking
over, and over, and over.
Not just because that's cool, and nuanced, and subtle,
all of that.
But fall into categorical thinking,
and you can do unspeakable damage in a realm of science
that makes the difference.
We will do so thinking constantly about ourselves
as a boring species just like all the others out there.
As a species that has the same boring physiology,
but uses it in ways that are unrecognizable.
As a species that does some things that are simply
without precedent out there.
And constantly struggling with what does biology
have to do with it?
General structure of the course-- the first half
of the course is going to be an overview,
an introduction to the various buckets,
the various categories.
And what we're going to go through
is understanding an introduction to evolutionary theory,
an introduction to what molecular genetics has
to do with behavior, behavioral genetics, ethology,
the brain, endocrinology, each of these buckets.
And you know what happens next, which
is in the second half of the course.
We will look at specific behaviors, and in each case rip
apart the buckets.
And in each case, do the strategy
of what does the behavior look like?
What happened a second before?
The world of neurons.
What happened with the sensory stimuli that trigger
those neurons, et cetera?
All the way back to the evolutionary selective
pressures.
So the first half of the course is
going to be the introduction to the buckets.
And I will tell you right off the bat
it is a total pain in the rear.
Because what we're going to be doing
is like every 2.5 lectures-- just when you were getting
the vocabulary down-- we're going
to jump to a completely different bucket.
It is going to be dizzying, and unpleasant, and all of that.
And then second half of the course,
oh, the rewards finally come of then putting all the pieces
together, looking at individual categories of behavior--
sexual behavior, aggressive behavior, parental behavior,
schizophrenia, depression, personality disorders, language
use.
In each of these cases, what's going on a second before?
What's going on 10 million years before?
Where do all these buckets disappear in the interactions?
So that's going to be the strategy for the course.
Something critical about how the course was designed
is it's got no prerequisites.
Because I really think this is a subject that everybody on Earth
should be forced to learn about it at gunpoint.
And thus, it's a good thing, I think,
to have this not be one of those upper level bio classes.
Let me just get a sense of who's here.
How many of you are bio types, bio majors, hum bio?
Psychology?
Anthro?
Are there any English Lit grad students in here?
Yeah.
OK.
Good for you.
Thank you for coming here.
See what you think in three months.
But nonetheless, the class has been designed explicitly
to have no background whatsoever.
How are we going to do that?
We're going to do the usual song and dance of weekly sections,
and reviews, and all that sort of thing.
But in addition, during this first half
of the course when we're jumping from category to category,
we're going to have each week additional sections--
a catchup section-- which is for people
who have no background in that area,
getting you through the basics, and getting you
up to speed so that you will be able to then know
what's up during the lectures.
So those will be posted.
The first one of these is-- let me make sure I've got this.
Yes.
It will be Thursday at 7:30 in the room next door.
And this is going to be the introduction
to evolutionary theory and getting
you ready for what will be the evolution lectures Wednesday
and Friday of this week.
If you don't have a strong background,
go to these catchup sections.
The TAs who will be giving that are really
expert in those areas, lots of background, and this
will be your chance to catchup.
Look through the handout.
I think I have a bunch of terms there
or something where if you are not terribly
familiar with those terms in some discipline, that's a sign
that you should probably go for some of the catchup stuff.
If you really are just doing this,
sort of being very adventurous with no background, if you can
take it pass/fail, that will take off
a lot of the pressure as well.
Because you could then actually pay attention to stuff here.
And the whole point here is to be
able to do this even if you don't have a science
background.
Because the obvious argument I would make
is everybody has to learn behavioral biology
because we're being behavioral biologists every time
we serve on a jury.
Every time we vote whether or not
money should be spent on solving some problem,
whether it's a problem, and whether it's solvable or not.
Every time we try to make sense of a family
member sunk in depression.
Are they having a biochemical disorder,
or are they just indulging themselves?
We're behavioral biologists all the time.
So it's probably a good thing that we be informed ones.
So the catchup sections there-- take advantage of them.
What else?
We will have weekly sections, the usual type.
People are not assigned to sections.
There's going to be 18 of them or so a week at various times.
Go to whichever works for you.
There will be a midterm in the middle, the midterm coming
as we finish the last of those categories, last
of those buckets.
There will be a final.
There's no paper or anything like that.
So that will be the pattern.
What else?
Other stuff here.
Office hours-- my office hours are up on the handout.
Other things-- breaks.
We will, with any luck, be able to be
able to be organized enough so that during each stretch
of class, there will be a five minute break in the middle
so you can stand up, and just get
to the front of the line for the bathroom,
and then we will resume promptly before you get in there.
So just to let you clear your heads a bit.
Assignments, books, reading.
There are two books that I have assigned for the course.
One is by me.
And you don't even have to read it.
Just go buy a bunch of copies of and bring me the receipt,
and you've got a great grade in there.
OK, so that's what is going to be
pertinent to the second half of the course.
We're going to give you a list of the chapters that
make the most sense to read.
The other book is a book by an author named
James Gleick called Chaos.
Chaos, year, after year, after year, in this class
provokes the strongest opinions.
A quarter of the people decide it
is the most irritating, irrelevant thing that
could possibly have been assigned in the class
and hate it.
About half the people never quite
figure out what's up with it.
And a quarter of the people, their life is transformed.
They no longer have to meditate.
They no longer have to have a-- they are at peace.
At peace, I tell you.
Because what this book does is introduce
this whole radically different way of thinking about biology,
taking apart a world of reductionism.
For 500 years, we all have been using a very simple model
for thinking about living systems.
Which is, if you want to understand something
that's complicated, you break it apart into its little pieces.
And once you understand the little pieces
and put it back together, you will
understand the complex thing.
And what Chaos as an entire field is about--
and this was pretty much the first book that
was meant for the lay public about it-- what Chaos shows
is that's how you fix clocks.
That's not how you fix behaviors.
That's not how you understand behaviors.
Behavior is not like a clock.
Behavior is like a cloud.
And you don't understand rainfall
by breaking a cloud down into its component pieces
and gluing them back together.
So read through that book.
A lot of it is from physical sciences rather than
biological, so we'll just be suggesting
the chapters you should read.
I will tell you it is the first book
since Baby Beluga where I've gotten to the last page
and immediately started reading it over again from the front.
Because along with Baby Beluga, it's
had the greatest influence on my life.
I found this to be the most influential book in my thinking
about science since college.
So that is a sign.
There will also be a bunch of lectures
in the second half of the course covering these fields of chaos
and complexity.
And if you really think about it,
it is going to force a change in everything else
that you bring to thinking about this subject.
In addition, at this moment there is not a reader.
Because I'm trying to avoid having to get
you guys to have to buy a reader.
I'm trying to redo all the assigned readings
so that will just be from papers that are available online,
that you'll be able to download.
I'm about halfway through getting them there.
With any luck, there will not have to be a reader.
But if it does exist, it's not going to be big.
It won't be terribly expensive.
But there will be a bunch of readings online to download,
and it will vary.
In some cases, it will be reading the whole paper.
In some cases, I'll be suggesting you just
read the abstract.
In some cases, it will be to understand what's happening
in the paper in detail.
In some cases, this is an example
of how people in this bucket think about this problem.
Just read the abstract.
So all of that will be assigned and made clear.
What other stuff?
There's going to be a huge amount of information online.
The coursework is going to be set up for the class.
There will be copies of the handouts.
There will be lecture notes.
Lecture notes that I have that will be about five to 10 pages
covering each lecture, which we'll get to about
the middle of the course.
And I suspect I will run out of steam by then.
So they won't occur for the second half.
There will be commonly asked questions.
There will be a Q&A. There will be course logistics.
Some of the slides will be put up in there.
Make use of that.
There will be announcements about time changing for office
hours, and things like that.
Make sure you make use of that.
And people who are not formally enrolled,
we are figuring out a way for you
to get access to it as well.
We've also made the decision that after this lecture,
the handouts will not be on paper.
And that is because roughly for each lecture,
we will go through about 5000 pieces of paper,
even double sided.
All of this stuff will get posted on Coursework the day
before.
And if that's going to make it impossible
for you to follow what happens in class because you are
the last human on Stanford who was not living off
of a computer screen, come and talk to me.
And we will slip you an actual paper copy of the handouts.
Most of them, with any luck, we can
avoid using paper just because of how many people there
are in here.
Let's see.
Other stuff.
Sections will start this Thursday.
The regular sections-- all of those will be posted,
the times for that.
Office hours won't start until next week.
The midterm will be in an evening
rather than during a class time.
And if we are on schedule, the class time that day
will be used for review.
And anything else?
Oh, a very good suggestion just now given that
the class before here is humongous,
and thus we have the impossible problem
of a lot of people trying to get out
of that while a lot of people are trying to get into that.
It might work best for everybody to come in from the top
so that you flow down the stairs seamlessly
and drive out those other people before us out the door there.
That might work a whole lot better.
Final thing is we have a team of TAs here.
And they are great.
Here they are.
TAs, stand up and be embarrassed.
OK, stand up, guys.
There they are.
There is all but one of them, who is in transit.
There you are.
These guys are great.
They have either taken the course before.
In some cases they have TA'd the course before.
They are grad students in various
of the bucket specialties.
I would strongly suggest taking advantage of the sections.
What will evolve after the first few weeks
is there will be the regular sections going over the course
material in the usual way.
There are also being more advanced sections for people
who have stronger backgrounds.
Take advantage.
OK, you guys can sit down.
Leaving them standing there awkwardly for hours afterward.
Take advantage of the sections.
Really greatly skilled TAs.
OK so that's basically what we got going here.
Are there any questions?
[INAUDIBLE]
Units.
OK, somebody emailed about units.
The class is five units, and it's
because we are meeting for so many hours a week.
Actually, for a while the class was a six-unit course.
And that was because of Condoleezza Rice.
Because when she was the provost here,
she totally screwed the biology department
by upping our teaching requirements
under really nasty conditions.
So what we all decided was to find ways,
every single sleazy trick we could
do to puff up the number of units
we were supposedly teaching.
So for a while, the five unit class
here would get you six units.
But eventually they caught us, so we stopped doing that.
So first she did that, and then weapons of mass destruction.
[LAUGHING]
So it's a five unit class at the moment.
Say hi for me if you run into her on campus.
So five units.
The workload, I think, will be commensurate with that.
But it's mainly because of heavy class time.
One additional thing-- lectures are
going to be taped and put up online with a day or so
on Coursework.
The reason for that is given that this spans two hour
block, a lot of people have to miss one of the hour blocks.
And in the past, it has worked to be able to get the stuff up
online.
So that will be advantageous for some folks.
OK.
Question?
Yes, there was a question up there.
[INAUDIBLE]
OK, you take it back.
OK, any other questions?
Bagel guy.
Did you get your bagel, or did somebody eat it?
[INAUDIBLE]
OK, good.
Good.
The social contract comes through.
Yeah?
[INAUDIBLE]
What's that?
[INAUDIBLE]
Yes.
I don't remember.
[LAUGHTER]
May 3rd.
May 3rd for the midterm.
7:30 in the evening.
It is a Monday.
June 4th for the final.
OK, more questions?
Yeah?
[INAUDIBLE]
What's the format of the midterm and the final?
In an ideal world, given the whole emphasis
here on no buckets, blah blah, et cetera,
It would be long essays, and requirements of sonnets,
and sensitive haikus about the hypothalamus.
But simply because of numbers in here,
we are reduced to sort of like the lowest common denominator,
a lot of multiple choice questions,
just to make things saner for the TAs.
Because it is an unbelievable job
to try to grade this many papers that quickly.
Broadly, intellectually, what the midterm
is going to be about is just touching base,
making sure you understand the basics of each
of those buckets, each of those disciplines.
A little bit of forcing you to think across disciplines.
What the final is going to be entirely about
is forcing you to think across the disciplines,
across the buckets there.
So it's going to be some very different intellectual foci
in there.
Midterm-- have the facts down.
Hopefully it won't be quite as mindless as that,
but that's the main function of the midterm.
OK, more questions?
[INAUDIBLE]
OK.
TAs, did you guys decide to videotape the catchup section?
[INAUDIBLE]
Audio, OK.
[INAUDIBLE]
OK.
Other office hours, or it's going to be taped and put up
online on Coursework.
And if there's critical handouts, visuals,
those will be posted there as well.
Good.
More questions?
[INAUDIBLE]
Yes.
And it's going to be for each.
It's going to be in advance of the next three lectures.
[INAUDIBLE]
Final is at 7:30 for two hours.
[INAUDIBLE]
The final?
Oh, the final, the final.
5:15.
[INAUDIBLE]
12:15.
[LAUGHTER]
Just to get that up there.
12:15.
More questions?
 The often asked question, what's the difference between Bio 150,
Bio 250, and-- is it Hum Bio 160?
No difference.
It's exactly the same.
So like the same requirements, same unit.
So take whichever one makes your life easiest.
Let's see.
Any other procedural stuff?
Well, the answers are back from Monday's questionnaire.
And a variety of interesting answers.
Not surprisingly, given the size of a group.
Why have you taken this course?
Really want to know about animal behavior, but willing to deal
with humans.
[LAUGHTER]
Because I'm substituting it Bio 43, which I don't want to take.
My dad used to make me read books about human behavior
and biology as punishment.
[LAUGHTER]
That doesn't make any sense.
I know one of the TAs, so I figure
that guarantees me an A. OK, guys, that's in your court.
One I really liked, because I want
to be a filmmaker after college.
Yay, interdisciplinary.
What else?
My first grade teacher is making me.
Tom McFadden told me to.
I'm a hyper-oxygenated dilettante.
I wanted to, somewhat correctly pointing out,
why have you taken this class?
I haven't taken it yet.
A number of people reporting that,
in fact, that was the correct answer.
And my favorite, why have you taken this course?
Yes.
[LAUGHTER]
OK.
Relevant background, relevant background.
I'm human, I'm human and I often behave.
I'm human and I have biology.
19 years of being confused about human behavior.
Not really, sort of.
Seeing crazy behavior as an RA in an all frosh dorm.
And I date a biologist.
Let's see.
There was also the question on there of,
did the thing on the board look more like an A or a B.
And just to really facilitate that one,
I forgot to put the A and the B up.
But that taps into a cognitive something or other,
which maybe I'll get back to at some point.
Telephone numbers.
Reading them off, accuracy dramatically
tanked as soon as the three number,
four number motif went down the tubes.
And when it came back briefly, accuracy
came back a little bit.
Finally, let's see.
All of you guys conform to a standard frequent gender
difference.
Which is everybody was roughly equally-- by gender-- roughly
equally likely to see dependent as the opposite of independent.
A small minority went for interdependent.
However, one finding that has come up over and over
is that far more females are interested in peace than males,
males are more interested in justice.
OK, have you taken the bio core.
Quote, no way Jose.
Somebody pointing out quite correctly,
don't settle for peace or justice.
Then of course, there was the person
who responded to that question by writing those words are just
symbols.
Need to know assumed meaning.
[LAUGHTER]
OK.
There was one questionnaire that was carefully
signed in something approaching calligraphy,
it was so beautiful.
And was otherwise blank.
For years running, the subject that most people really
want to hear, and most people really don't want to hear,
is about the biology of religiosity.
And for 22 years running now, Stanford students
are more interested in depression than sex.
[LAUGHTER]
OK.
So we start off.
I keep telling Hennessy about this, but nothing gets done.
We start off.
We start off, if I can open this--
which is something you can do if you have
a certain type of training.
If you're some osteologist, or whatever these folks are
called.
If you are presented those two skulls
and told this one's a female, this one's
a male, you can begin to figure out stuff like how heavy,
how large the body was of that individual, what
diseases they had, had they undergone malnutrition,
had they given birth, a lot of times, a few times,
were they bipedal.
All sorts of stuff you could figure out
from just looking at these skulls.
What today's lecture, and Friday's, is about
is the fact that with the right tools under your belt,
you could look at these two skulls
and know that information.
You are a field biologist, and you've discovered this brand
new species.
And you see that this one nurses an infant
shortly before leaping out of the tree,
leaving only the skull.
And this one has a penis, shortly
before leaping out of the tree and leaving a skull.
So all you know is this is an adult female and an adult male.
And if you've got the right tools there,
you can figure out who's more likely to cheat on the other.
Is the female more likely to mess around, or is the male?
How high are the levels of aggression?
Does the female tend to have twins, or one kid at a time?
Do females choose males because they have good parenting
skills, or because they're big, hunky guys?
What levels of differences in life expectancy?
Do they live the same length of time?
You would be able to tell whether they have the same life
expectancy or if there's a big discrepancy between the two.
All sorts of stuff like that, merely
by applying a certain piece of logic
that dominates all of this.
OK, so you're back reading those Time Life nature
books back when, and there was always a style of thing
you would go through.
Which is they'd describe some species
doing something absolutely amazing and unlikely,
and it goes like this.
The giraffe, the giraffe has a long neck,
and it obviously has to have a big heart
to pump all that blood up there.
And you lock up a whole bunch of biomechanics people
with slide rules, and out they come out with this prediction
as to how big the giraffe heart should be
and how thick the walls.
And you go and you measure a giraffe heart,
and it's exactly what the equations predicted.
And you say, isn't nature amazing?
Or you read about some desert rodents that drink once
every three months, and another bunch of folks
have done math and figured out how many miles long
the renal tubules have to be.
And somebody goes and studies it,
and it's exactly as you expect it.
Isn't nature wonderful?
No, nature isn't wonderful.
You couldn't have giraffes unless they
had hearts that were that big.
You couldn't have rodents living in the desert
unless they had kidneys that worked in a certain way.
There is an inevitable logic about how organisms function,
how organisms are built, how organisms
have evolved solving this problem of optimizing
the solution.
And what the next two lectures are about is,
you can take the same exact principles
and apply them to thinking about the evolution of behavior.
The same sort of logic where, just
as you could sit there and, with logical principles,
come to the point of saying, a giraffe's heart
is going to be this big.
You can go through a different realm of logic built
around evolutionary principles and figure out all sorts
of aspects of social behavior.
And we already know what's involved in, say, optimizing.
What's the optimal number of whatevers in your kidney.
What's the optimal behavior strategy or something.
All of us, as soon as we got some kid sibling,
learned how to do the optimal strategy in tic-tac-toe.
So that you could never lose, and it's totally boring.
But that's a case of figuring out the optimal solution
to behavior, reaching what is called the Nash equilibrium.
And actually, I have no idea what I just said.
But I like making reference to Nash,
because it makes me feel quantitative or something.
So that is called the Nash equilibrium.
The Nash equilibrium, and what the entire point here is,
the same sort of process of figuring out
what are the rules of optimizing tic-tac-toe behavior
can be built upon the principles of evolution
to figure out all sorts of realms
of optimized social behavior.
And broadly, this is a field that's known as sociobiology,
emerging in the late 1970s-- mid 1970s or so.
And by the late 1980s, giving birth
to another discipline known as evolutionary psychology.
The notion that you cannot understand behavior,
and you cannot understand internal psychological states,
outside the context of evolution had something to do with
sculpting those behaviors and those psyches.
So to start off with that, basic song and dance about Darwin.
Just to make sure we're up to speed on this.
Darwin, just to get some things out of the way.
Darwin did not discover evolution.
People knew about evolution long before that.
Darwin came up with the notion of a mechanism
for evolution, natural selection.
And in fact, Darwin is the inventor of that.
There was another guy, Alfred Russel Wallace,
the two of them.
And, for some reason, Wallace has gotten screwed historically
and Darwin gets much more attention.
But starting off with a Darwinian view of how evolution
works.
First thing being that there is evolution.
Traits in populations change over time.
Traits can change enough that, in fact, you
will get speciation.
New species will form.
And the logic of Darwinian evolution
is built on just a few couple of very reasonable steps.
First one is that there are traits that are heritable.
Traits that could be passed on one generation to the next.
Traits that we now can translate,
in our modern parlance, into traits that are genetic.
And we will see, soon, how that's totally not correct
to have said that.
But traits that are heritable.
The next thing is that there is variability among those traits.
There's different ways in which this trait can occur,
and they're all heritable.
The next critical thing.
Some versions of those traits are more adaptive than others.
Some versions work better for you.
For example, giraffe who wind up with hearts
the size of, like, a tomato, that's not an optimal version.
Amid the range of variability, some
will carry with them more fitness, more adaptiveness,
than others.
And that translates into another sound bite
that's got to be gotten rid of.
All of this is not about survival of the most adapted.
It's about reproduction, something we will
come to over and over again.
It's about the number of copies of genes you
leave in the next generation.
So you've got to have traits that are heritable.
There's got to be variability in them.
Some of those traits are more adaptive than others.
Some of those traits make it more
likely that that organism passes on copies of its genes
into the next generation.
And throw those three pieces together, and what you will get
is evolution in populations.
Changing frequencies of traits.
And when you throw in one additional piece, which
is every now and then the possibility
to have a random introduction of a new type of trait
in there-- modern parlance, a mutation-- from that,
you can begin to get actual large changes in what
a population looks like.
OK, so these are the basic building blocks of Darwin.
And it is easy to apply it to giraffes' hearts
and kidneys of desert rats, and everything we think about
in the world of physiology, anatomy,
in the context of evolution.
So how do you apply it to behavior?
And the basic notion, for folks who've
come from this Darwinian tradition
into thinking about behavior, is you do the exact same thing.
There are behaviors that are heritable, types, traits,
classes of behaviors.
They come with a certain degree of variation among individuals.
Some versions of them are more adaptive than others.
Over time, the more adaptive versions
will become more commonplace.
And every now and then, you can have mutations
that introduce new variability.
Totally logical, absolutely unassailable.
And what we're going to spend an insane amount of time
in this class on is one simple assumption
in there, which is that certain behaviors are heritable.
That certain behaviors have genetic components.
And as you'll see, this one is just
going to run through every lecture wrestling
with that issue there.
This is a big incendiary issue there as to how genetic--
and that's not the same thing as saying
how genetically determined-- how genetic behavior is.
So that's going to be an issue we come back to again
and again.
So now, transitioning into how you would apply
these Darwinian principles.
First thing before starting, a caveat.
You're going to wind up, in order to think about all
of this most efficiently, hopefully do some personifying.
Personifying as in, you'll sit around saying, well,
what would a female chimpanzee want
to do at this point to optimize the number of copies
of her genes in the next generation?
What would this brine shrimp want
to do to deal with this environmental stressor?
What would this cherry tree do?
They're not planning.
They're not conscious.
They're not taking classes in evolutionary biology.
What would this organism want to do
is just a shorthand for something sculpted
by the sort of exigencies of evolution,
and reducing the optimal.
They want to do this.
This is just going to be a short hand throughout.
Once you get past the apes, nobody
is wanting to do any of these optimization things.
So just getting that sort of terminology out of the way.
OK, so we start off with what's the first building
block of applying Darwinian principles to behavior.
Something that is absolutely critical to emphasize,
because the first thing we all need to do
is unlearn something we all learned back when on all those
National Geographic specials and that would consistently
teach us something about this aspect of evolution,
and would always teach it to us wrong.
Here's the scenario.
So you're watching, and there's this wildlife documentary.
It's dawn on the savanna.
And you see, there's a whole bunch lions
on top of some big old dead thing.
Some buffalo, or something.
And they're chewing away and having a fine time.
So something happens at that point,
which is, they have to deal with how they divvy up the food.
Or let me give you another example.
Another standard, sort of endless vignette
that comes up in these films.
Once again, now, you're back on the savanna.
It's not dawn this time, but you are
looking at one of the magnificent things
of the natural world, which is the migration of zebras
throughout East Africa.
A herd of 2 million of them migrate around, following
a cyclical pattern of rains.
So they're always going where the grass is greener.
So you've got this wonderful herd of 2 million wildebeest,
and there's a problem.
Which is, there's some great field right in front of them
full of grass, and bummer, there's
a river in between them and the next field.
And especially a bummer, a river teeming with crocodiles
just ready to grab them.
So what are the wildebeest going to do?
And according to the National Geographic type
specials we would get, out would come a solution.
There's all the wildebeest hemming and hawing
in this agitated state by the edge of the river.
And suddenly, from the back of the crowd,
comes this elderly wildebeest who pushes his way up
to the front, stands on the edge of the river
and says, I sacrifice myself for you,
meine kinder, and throws himself into the river--
[LAUGHTER]
--where immediately, the crocs get busy eating him up.
And the other two million wildebeest
could tiptoe around the other way across the river,
and everybody is fine.
And you're then saying, why'd this guy do this?
Why did this guy fling himself into the river?
And we would get the answer at that point.
The answer that is permeated as, like, the worst urban myth
of evolution.
Whatever.
Why did he do that?
Because animals behave for the good of the species.
This is the notion that has to be completely trashed right
now.
Animals behaving for the good of the species
really came to the forefront, a guy in the early 60s named
Wynne-Edwards.
Hyphenated, Wynne-Edwards.
Some hyphenated Brit zoologist, who pushed most strongly
this notion of that animals behave
for the good of the species.
He is reviled throughout every textbook, Wynne-Edwards
and group selection.
That would be the term, selection
for the good of groups, for the selection
for the good of the species.
Wynne-Edwards and group selection.
I'm sure the guy did all sorts of other useful things.
And anyone who really has any depth to them would find out.
But all I know is that the guy is the one who
came up with group selection.
Animals behave for the good of the species.
This isn't the case at all.
Animals behave for passing on as many copies of their genes
as possible.
And what we'll see is, when you start
looking at the nuances of that, sometimes it
may look like behaving for the good of the species.
But it really isn't the case.
So animals behave in order to maximize
the number of copies of genes they
leave in the next generation.
Remember, not survival of the fittest,
reproduction of the fittest.
So first thing you need to do is go back to that vignette
and saying, so what's up with the wildebeest there?
And what's up with the elderly guy who jumps in the river?
And finally, when you look at them long enough
instead of the camera crew showing up for three minutes,
when you studied this closely enough,
you see something that wasn't apparent at first.
Which is, this elderly wildebeest
is not fighting his way through the crowd.
This guy is being pushed from behind.
[LAUGHTER]
This guy is being pushed from behind,
because all the other ones are saying,
yeah, get the old guy on the river.
Sacrificing himself, my ass.
This guy is getting pushed in by everybody else.
He is not sacrificing himself for the good of the species.
He does not like the idea of this whatsoever.
So he gets pushed in because the old, weak guy.
None of this group selection stuff.
What came in by the '70s as a replacement,
a way to think about this, is this notion of animals,
including us, behaving not for the good of the species
or of the group, but to maximize the number of copies of genes
left in the next generation.
And what you see is three ways in which this could occur.
Three building blocks.
The first one being known as individual selection.
The first one, built around the notion
that sometimes the behavior of an animal
is meant to optimize the number of copies of its genes
that it leaves in the next generation
by itself reproducing.
The drive to reproduce, the drive
to leave more copies of one's genes.
This was once summarized really sort of tersely as,
sometimes a chicken is an egg's way of making another chicken.
No, that's backwards.
Sometimes a chicken is an egg's way of making another egg.
OK, ignore that.
What the guy said is, sometimes a chicken is an egg's way
of making another egg.
All this behavior stuff, and all this animate social
interaction, is just an epiphenomenon
to get more copies of the genes into the next generation.
Individual selection, a subset of way of thinking about this
is selfish genes.
What behavior is about is maximizing
the number of copies of genes in the next generation.
And sometimes the best way to do it, sometimes
the way that animals maximize, is to get as many copies
by way of reproducing themselves.
It's not quite equivalent to The Selfish Gene,
but for our purposes, individual selection.
And this can play out in a number of realms.
And bringing in sort of a big dichotomy
in thinking about evolutionary pressures, Darwin
and the theory of natural selection.
What natural selection is about is
processes bringing about an organism who is more adaptive,
what we just went through.
Darwin soon recognized there was a second realm of selection,
which he called sexual selection.
And what that one's about is, this
is selecting for traits that have
no value whatsoever in terms of survival or anything like that.
Traits that carry no adaptive value,
but for some random, bizarre reason, the opposite sex
likes folks who look this way.
So they get to leave more copies of their genes.
And suddenly, you could have natural selection bringing
about big, sharp antlers in male moose,
and they use that for fighting off predators or fighting
with a male.
That would be natural selection.
Sexual selection might account for the fact
that the antlers are green, paisley patterns all
over for that.
And for some reason, that looks cool.
The female moose is, and what you wind up
getting as a mechanism for sexual selection
is, as long as individuals prefer to mate with individuals
with some completely arbitrary traits,
those traits will also become more common.
So this dichotomy of natural selection
for traits driven by traits that really do
aid leaving copies of genes outside the realm of just
sheer sexual preference, sexual selection.
And sometimes they can go in absolutely opposite directions.
You can get some species where the female fish
prefer male fish that have very bright coloration.
And that's advantageous, then, to have the bright coloration
by means of sexual selection.
But the bright coloration makes you
more likely to get predated by some other fish.
Natural selection pushing against bright coloration
in males.
Very often, you've got the two going against each other,
having to balance.
So how would that be applied in this realm
of individual selection?
This first building block.
Sometimes an egg-- damn.
Sometimes a chicken is an egg's way of making another egg.
Sometimes what behavior is about is one individual trying
to maximize the number of copies of their genes
in the next generation.
A natural selection manifestation of it
being, you're good at running away from predators.
Selection for speed, for certain types of muscle metabolism,
for certain sets of sensory systems that will tell you
there's somebody scary around.
That would be the realm of that.
Individual selection, selecting the realm of sexual selection
to have more of whatever those traits that are attractive.
So this first building block, it's not group selection.
It's not behaving for the good of the species.
It's behaving to maximize the number of copies of one's genes
in the next generation.
And the most straightforward way is
to behave in a way to maximize the number of times
you reproduce yourself.
Second building block, which is, there
is another way of accomplishing the same thing that you just
did with individual selection, as follows.
One of the things that can be relied upon in life
is that you are related to your relatives.
And what you get is, the more closely related you are,
the more genes you share in common with them.
On a statistical level, identical twins
share 100% of their genes.
Full siblings, 50%.
Half siblings, 25%.
This is exactly something that's going
to be covered in the catch up section this week.
If you're not comfortable with this stuff, this sort of thing
will be reviewed in more detail.
OK, so the closer a relative is to you,
the more genes they share in common with you.
So suddenly, you've got this issue.
You're an identical twin and your identical sibling
has the same genes that you do.
Individual selection, you will be just as successful
as passing on copies of your genes into the next generation
if you forgo reproducing to make it
possible for your identical twin to do so.
Because on the level of just sheer numbers
of copies of genes in the next generation,
they are equivalent.
And sometimes, you will thus get behavior which really decreases
the reproductive success of an individual
in order to enhance the success of a relative.
But you've got a constraint there,
which is, all of your relatives don't
share all your genes with you.
They have differing degrees of relatedness.
And what that winds up producing is another factor,
another observation.
One of the great, witty geneticists of all time, a guy
named Haldane who, apparently, once in a bar
was trying to explain this principle to somebody
and came up and said, I will gladly
lay down my life for two brothers or eight cousins.
And that's the math of the relatedness.
You passing on one copy of your genes
to the next generation is, from the sheer mathematics of just
how evolution is going to play out over the generations,
is exactly equivalent as giving up your life for eight cousins
to be able to each pass on a copy of their genes.
Because you share 1/8 with each of them,
and it winds up being a whole [INAUDIBLE].
And it's that math.
And out of that, you get something that
makes perfect sense instantly.
Which is, evolution selects for organisms cooperating
with their relatives.
Something along those lines.
And thus we have this second building block
known as kin selection.
Inclusive fitness.
Kin selection.
First building block, individual selection, passing on copies
of your own genes as a way to maximize future success.
Second version, helping out relatives.
Helping out relatives in terms of increasing
their reproductive success with this vicious mathematical
logic, which is one identical twin
to have two full siblings, eight cousins, and so on,
as a function of degree of relatedness.
And what this begins to explain is a whole world
in animal behavior of animals being obsessed with kinship.
Animals being fully aware of who is related to who in what
sorts of ways.
Animals being utterly aware of you
cooperate with relatives, but as a function of how
closely related they are.
Animals put us in Social Anthropology, in kinship terms,
and could you marry the daughter of your uncle's third wife
or whatever, to shame in terms of how
much a lot of social animals deal with relatedness.
So inclusive fitness, kin selection.
Here would be evidence for it.
Here's one example.
Very cool study done some years back by a couple, Seyfarth
and Cheney, University of Pennsylvania,
looking at vervet monkeys.
And these were vervet monkeys out in Tanzania, I believe.
What they did was, a whole bunch of these vervet monkeys
were sitting around.
And they, the researchers, had made really high quality
recording recordings of various vocalizations
from the monkeys over time.
So they had the sound of each animal giving an alarm call,
giving a friendly gesture call, giving a whatever.
And what they would then do is hide a microphone
inside some bushes and play the sound of one of the infants
from the group giving an alarm call.
So what does the mother of that infant do?
She instantly gets agitated and looks over at the bush.
That's her child, all of that.
How to know that everyone else in that vervet group
understands kin selection, what does everybody else do?
They all look at the mother.
That's whoever's mother, what is she going to do next?
They understand the relatedness, and they understand
what the response will be.
All the other vervets look at the mother at that point.
Whoa, I'm sure glad that's not my kid giving an alarm
call from the bushes.
They understand kinship.
Another version of that came out in these studies.
So you've got two females, each of whom has a kid, a daughter,
whatever.
And female A and female B. And one day, female A
does something absolutely rotten to female B.
And later that day, the child of female B
is more likely than chance to do something rotten
to the child of female A. They're
keeping track of not only revenge,
but not revenge on the individual who
did something miserable to you, but displaced by one
degree of reproduction.
Keeping track of kinship.
Animals can do this.
All sorts of primate species can do this.
And as we'll see, all sorts of other species can do this also.
There is that caveat again.
All sorts of other species want to figure out
who their cousins-- they don't want to figure out.
Evolution has sculpted an ability
to optimize behavior along lines of relatedness
in all sorts of species.
So how would natural selection play out
in this realm of kin selection, I will lay down
my life for eight cousins.
And that's just sort of obvious there by now.
How would sexual selection play out in this realm.
I am willing to expend great amounts of energy
to convince people that my sibling is incredibly hot.
And with any chance, then passing
on more copies of genes.
That would be inclusive fitness, kin selection in both cases.
Decreasing your own reproductive potential
by way of being killed by a predator to save the 8 cousins,
or having to spend so much time haranguing about your sibling.
Doings that, in order to increase
the reproductive success of relatives,
where you were willing to give up more energy
and potential on your part, the more closely related
the individual is.
So you throw those two pieces together,
and you're suddenly off and running
with explaining a lot of animal behavior.
Individual selection, none of this
for the good of the species.
Maximizing the number of copies of your own genes.
And the easiest way, the most straightforward,
is you yourself maximizing reproduction.
Foundation number two the whole thing, kin selection.
Sometimes the best way of leaving more copies of genes
in the next generation is using up
your own reproductive potential foregoing
to help relatives as a function of degree of relatedness.
OK, that's great.
So now the third piece, the third final building block
of making sense of social behavior in the context
of real contemporary evolutionary theory,
the third block here.
Which is, you look at animals and they're not all just
competing with non-relatives.
Animals forego competition at certain points.
Animals would have the potential to be
aggressive to other animals, and they will forego doing so.
And there's one circumstance in which that can happen,
where you get what is called a rock-paper-scissors scenario.
You've got animals A, B, and C. A has a means of damaging B,
but it costs A. B has a means of damaging C,
but it costs B. C can damage A, but it
costs A. You get the right distribution of individuals
with one of those traits in a population,
and you will reach a rock-scissors-paper equilibrium
where nobody's doing anything rotten to each other.
Great example, totally cool example that got
published some years ago by a guy named Brendan Bohannan, who
was assistant professor in the department here at the time.
He was studying something or other about bacteria
showing a rock-paper-scissors circumstance.
You had three different types, three different versions,
of this bacteria in this colony he had made.
The first one could generate a poison, but it cost.
It had to put the effort into making that poison
and protecting itself from that poison, all of that.
The second type was vulnerable to the poison.
It happened to have some transporter on its membrane
that took up the poison, and that was bad news.
But it had an advantage, which is the rest of the time,
that transporter took up more food.
The third one, the good thing going
for it is that it didn't have-- the bad thing
was, it didn't have poison.
A good thing going for it was it didn't
have to spend energy on a poison,
and it didn't have that transporter.
So each one of those has a strength, each one of those
has a vulnerability.
They're like, I don't know, Pokemon or something.
And you put them all together there,
and you get a rock-paper-scissors scenario
where you get equilibrium, where they are not
attacking each other.
Because note, if I am A and I destroy B,
B's no longer wiping out C, who's
the one who could damage me.
It's got to come to an equilibrium state.
So you can get the evolution of stalemates like that,
and that's quite frequently seen.
And note here, this was the evolution
of stalemates not in chimps, not in cetaceans, but in bacteria.
What we're going to see is bacterial behavior,
to the extent that this is sort of a metaphor for behavior.
Behavior of all sorts of unlikely species
are subject to these same rules of passing
on copies of your genes.
These three different strains of bacteria
are competing with each other.
None of them are behaving for the good of the species there
of the three of them.
So rock-paper-scissors is very cool,
and you get versions of that in humans.
That's been sort of studied quantitatively, all of that.
But that's not real cooperation.
That's merely everybody realizing
we have to cut back on the competition.
We have to cut back on the aggression.
Because every time I damage whoever,
I am more vulnerable in another realm.
That's a stalemate.
That's a truce.
But you look at animals, and in all sorts of realms,
it's not just rock-paper-scissors stalemates
they're reaching.
They actually cooperate with each other.
And you look close enough, and you see they're not relatives.
They're not relatives, yet you get
all sorts of altruistic behavior,
and you've got it under a whole bunch of domains.
Because this brings up the question,
why should you ever be cooperative
with another individual if you are a social animal.
At every possibility, you should stab them in the back
and be selfish.
And the reason why that isn't a good idea
is, there's all sorts of circumstances where
many hands make the task light.
Or whatever that is, cooperation can have synergistic benefits.
And you see that with species that
are cooperative hunters, where they are not necessarily
relatives.
They will chase one, chasing an animal
while the other is getting ready to cut a corner on it.
Cooperative behavior, and they increase the likelihood
of them getting a kill.
Another example of this.
Research by a guy named Mark Hauser
at Harvard looking at rhesus monkeys.
And what he showed was, he would put these monkeys
in a situation where they had access to food.
They had access to food under one circumstance,
where they could reach for it and take it in and share it
with another monkey.
Under the other circumstance, it required two monkeys
to get the food in there.
And what he showed was clear cut reciprocity.
Monkeys who were sharing with this guy
were more likely to get shared back with
and got more cooperation when it was a task where two of them
had to work together to get the food.
One alone wasn't enough.
Many hands make the task lighter under all sorts
of circumstances.
Cooperation has a strong evolutionary payoff,
even among non-relatives, with a condition.
Which is, you're not putting more into it
than you are getting.
That is reciprocal.
And ' opens up the third building block of all of this,
which is reciprocal altruism.
Cooperation, altruistic behavior among non-relatives,
but undergoing very strict constraints of,
it's gotta be reciprocated with all sorts of rules like that.
So what does that look like.
You're going to see reciprocal altruism,
when would you see that.
What's the immediate thing, what sort of species
would show systems of reciprocal cooperation
among non-relatives.
They've got to be smart animals.
They've got to be social.
They've got to be smart.
Why do they have to be smart?
Because they have to remember, this
is the guy who owes me a favor from last Thursday.
They need to be able to recognize individuals.
They have to be long lived enough so that there's
a chance of interacting with that individual
again and establishing this reciprocity.
You would thus predict you would see
systems of reciprocal altruism only in long
lived social vertebrates.
But you see the exact sorts of things in bacteria.
You see the exact sort of things in fungi.
You see that in all sorts of other realms.
You get social bacteria, colonizing bacteria.
And where what you might get are two clonal lines
that are together.
In other words, two genetically-- two lines,
each of which is, all the bacteria
have the same genetic makeup.
So think of it as one individual who's just kind of dispersed.
Another one who's just kind of dispersed.
And they've come together in something
called a fruiting body, which is how bacteria reproduce
or whatever.
And there's two parts to a fruiting body.
There's one which is the stalk, which
attaches to something or other.
And then there is the part that actually fruits.
So you want to be in the fruiting part,
because that's the part that actually reproduces,
and the stalk is doing all the work there.
And what you see is attempts at cheating.
Attempts at one of these strains trying
to disproportionately wind up in the fruiting part,
and what you also see is, the next time
around, this other strain will not cooperate with it.
Will not form a social colony.
So that's getting played off at the level of single cell
organisms forming big social colonies.
Getting played at that level.
Yes, as we will see, reciprocal altruism
works most readily in big, smart, long
lived social beasts.
But it can occur in all sorts of systems.
What it's built around is reciprocal cooperation.
And intrinsic in that it is another motivation going
on there.
Not just to involve the reciprocal relationship
with a non-relative, and many hands, and light tasks,
and all of that.
But also, whenever possible, to cheat.
To take advantage of the other individual.
And thus, another key facet of it
is to be very good at detecting when somebody
is cheating against you.
To be vigilant about cheating in what
would otherwise be a stable, reciprocal relationship.
And an awful lot of social behavior
is built around animals either trying
to get away with something or spotting somebody else
doing the same.
An example of it.
There is a test that's used in evolutionary psychology
where you are given this very complicated story,
or another version of a complicated story, where
somebody promises if you do this, you'll get this reward.
But if you do that, you're going to get this punishment.
And really complex.
And one outcome, the outcome of it
is, the person isn't supposed to get rewarded.
But the individual decides to reward them.
Spontaneous act of kindness.
In another circumstance, the person
is the individual who is supposed to get rewarded,
and instead, they get punished.
A cheater in that case.
And amid these convoluted stories,
people are much better-- 75% to 25%--
are much better at detecting when cheating has gone
on in the story than when a random act of kindness has gone
on.
We are more attuned to picking up cheating.
And remarkably, some very subtle studies
have been done with chimps showing
that chimps have the same bias.
They are much better at picking up
social interactions involving cheating than ones that
involve spontaneous altruism.
So you see here, this balance between cooperation,
reciprocal, even among non-relatives.
And that's great, but you should cheat
when you can get away with it.
But you should be vigilant against cheaters.
And what, of course, it comes down to then
is tic-tac-toe and giraffe hearts and all of that.
What is the optimal strategy in a particular social species
for a particular individual.
What is the optimal strategy.
When do you cooperate and when do you cheat.
When do you defect on the cooperative relationship
you've had.
And this introduces us to a whole world
of mathematics built around what is called game theory.
The notion that there are games, formal games, that
have mathematically optimal strategies,
or multiple strategies, multi-equilibrium.
And a whole world of research has
been built around them in terms of when to cooperate
and when to defect.
So game theory stuff.
This was starting off in a world of people
studying economics, and negotiation, and diplomacy,
and all of that.
And that was a whole world built around this logic
of when do you cooperate, when do you cheat.
And what came out of there were all sorts
of models of how to optimize behavior in terms of that.
And the building block, sort of the fruit fly of game theory,
is a game called the prisoner's dilemma.
Prisoner's dilemma, sort of cutting to-- sort of getting
rid of the details.
Two individuals are prisoners, and they escape,
and they're both captured.
And they're interrogated separately.
And both of them refuse to talk, that's great for them.
If they both squeal, they both get punished.
If one of them is able to squeal on the other one,
they get a great reward.
If the other one-- what you get formally
are four possible outcomes.
Both individuals cooperate, both individuals
cheat against each other, individual A cooperates and B
cheats, individual B cooperates and A cheats.
And what you get in prisoner's dilemma
is a formal payoff for each.
What gives you the greatest payoff, stabbing
the other guy in the back.
You cheat and they cooperate.
You have exploited them, you have taken advantage of them,
isn't that wonderful.
That's the highest payoff in prisoner dilemma games.
Second highest payoff, you both cooperate.
Third highest payoff-- which is beginning
to not count as a payoff, but in a lot of the games, this set up
is the start of punishment-- both of you
cheat on each other.
Fourth worst possible payoff is you're the sucker.
You cooperate, and the other individual
stabs you in the back.
So what the prisoner's dilemma game
is set up these circumstances where individuals will play
versions of this against each other with varying rewards
and that sort of thing, and parameters that we will
look at in a lot of detail.
And seeing when is it optimal to cooperate,
when is it optimal to cheat.
When would you do this.
So you've got examples of this, and this
was the building block.
And what anyone would say looking at this is,
it's obvious.
What you want to do is, in some way,
rationally maximize your payoff.
This whole world of Homo economists,
the notion of humans as being purely rational decision
makers.
And what you begin to see in this world of game theory is,
there is anything but that going on.
Later in the course, we're going to see
something very interesting.
People playing prisoner's dilemma games inside a brain
scanner, looking at a part of the brain that
has a lot to do with pleasure.
And what you see is, some individuals
activate that part of the brain when they have successfully
stabbed the other guy in the back.
Some individuals activate it when they have both cooperated.
And there's a big gender difference
as to which circumstance.
[LAUGHTER]
So you just guess which one is going on there.
We're going to see a number of studies
like that coming down the line.
So the question becomes, how do you
optimize prisoner dilemma play?
And what emerged at that time was
the notion of all sorts of theoretical models and stuff.
And then in the 1970s, there was an economist
at University of Michigan named Robert Axelrod who
revolutionized the entire field.
What he did was he took some paleolithic computer
and programmed in how the prisoner's dilemma would
be played.
And he could program in as if there were two players.
And he could program in what each one's strategy would be.
And what he then did was, he wrote to all of his buddies
and all of his mathematician friends and prize fighters
and theologians and serial murderers and Nobel Peace Prize
winners, and in each case, explained
what was up and saying, what strategy would you use
in a prisoner's dilemma game?
And he gets them all back, and he programs
all these different versions.
And he runs a round robin tournament.
Every strategy is paired against every other strategy
at one point or other.
And you look at what the payoff is.
You ask, which is the most optimal strategy.
And out of it, shockingly to everyone--
because this was a computer teaching us optimizing
human behavior-- out of it came one simple strategy that
always out-competed the others.
This is people sitting there, probabilistic ones
as to when to cooperate, and lunar cycles as to what to do.
The one that always won is now called tit for tat.
You start off cooperating in the very first round
with the individual.
You cooperate.
If the individual has cooperated with you in that round,
you cooperate in the next round.
And you cooperate, cooperate, as long
as the other individual cooperates.
But as soon as there is a round where the individual cheats
against you, you cheat against them the next time.
If they cheated at you that time also,
you cheat against them the next time.
If they go back to cooperating, you
go back to cooperating the next time.
You have this tit for tat strategy.
In the absence of somebody stabbing you in the back,
you will always cooperate.
And what they found was, run these hundreds
of thousands of versions of these round robin tournaments,
and tit for tat was the one that was most optimal,
to begin to use a word that is not just
going to be a metaphor.
Tit for tat always drove the other strategies
into extinction.
And what you wound up seeing is this optimized strategy.
And it was very clear why tit for tat worked so well.
Number one, it was nice.
You start off cooperating.
Number two, it retaliates if you do something crummy to it.
Number three, it is forgiving.
If you go back to cooperating.
Number four, it's clear cut in its play.
It's not some probabilistic thing.
What you get, then, with tit for tat is,
suppose you're playing three rounds with another individual.
You both cooperate the first one,
you both cooperate the next one.
You're playing tit for tat strategy,
so you cooperate on this one.
And they stab you in the back, and you can't get back at them,
because this is the last round.
What you'll see is, under lots of circumstances,
tit for tat is disadvantageous.
But what the soundbite is about it is, tit for tat
may lose the battles, but it wins all the wars.
This pattern of being nice, but being retaliatory, being
forgiving, and being clear in the rules,
drives all the other strategies into extinction.
OK, at this point my alarm just went off,
which was to remind me to ask somebody
who is wearing a life vest-- is somebody wearing a life vest?
[INAUDIBLE]
Over there.
Where are you?
She just left.
She left.
Isn't that interesting?
Somebody put me up to having to ask this person,
why are you wearing a life vest?
And apparently the answer she would give
was going to free all sorts of captives in some rebel group
in Colombia.
And she fled.
OK, what that does is--
[LAUGHTER]
I don't know what that says about reciprocal altruism.
But what that says also is, after I do a summary,
don't make a move.
We will have a five minute break.
So what do we have at this point,
we have the first building block of optimizing
the evolution of behavior, like optimizing giraffe hearts.
First piece, you don't behave for the good of the species.
Individual selection, passing on as many copies
of your own genes as possible.
Sometimes a chicken is an egg's way of making another egg,
he says triumphantly.
Building block number two, kin selection.
Some of the time, the best way to pass on copies of your genes
is by way of helping relatives.
Kin selection, with the mathematical fierceness
of degree of relatedness driving it.
Piece three, sometimes what's most advantageous
is to cooperate, even with non-relatives,
but with the rules of it has to be reciprocal
and you have to cheat when possible.
You have to be on guard against cheaters.
And as we've just seen, game theory, prisoner's dilemma,
beginning to formalize optimal strategies for that.
OK, let's take a five minute break.
But promise you will come back if you go out,
and everyone won't wander off.
Altruism [INAUDIBLE] game theory as being a form or way
to maximize that behavior in a very artificial realm,
but stay tuned.
Prisoner's dilemma as the building block
of how to do this amid lots of other types
of games that are used.
But prisoner's dilemma is the most basic one.
And that round robin tournament, that computer simulation,
Axelrod asking all his buddies to tell him
what strategy would you use, run them against each other,
and out comes tit for tat.
Tit for tat drives all the others into extinction.
However, there is a vulnerability
in tit for tat, which is-- OK, so.
We have the technical way of showing prisoner's dilemma
play.
And first round, both individuals are cooperating.
Second round, both individuals are cooperating.
Third round, this one cheats-- those are fangs.
This one cheats and this one cooperates.
So the next round, this one now cheats and this one
goes back to cooperating, and we've just
gotten through a scary thing that tit for tat solves,
and it's great.
Wonderful.
What if, though, your system is not 100% perfect.
What if there's a the possibility
of a mistake being made, of sending the wrong signal.
What if there's the possibility of noise in the communication
system.
And at some point, an individual who
does a cooperative behavior, thanks to a glitch
in the system, it is read as having been defection.
So what happens as a result?
This individual-- forget it.
OK, what happens as a result. The individual who cooperated,
but somehow the message got through as cheating,
they don't know.
Something got lost in the wires between them in translation.
The other individual was saying whoa,
that individual cheated against me.
I'm going to cheat in the next round.
So along comes the next round, and that individual
cheats against them.
This one who's cooperating, because they've
been cooperating all along.
They don't know about this error.
And they say whoa, that person just cheated against me.
I'm going to cheat in the next round.
So they cheat in the next round.
This one says whoa, they just cheated another time,
again and again and again.
And what you get is a seesaw pattern for the rest of time.
You've just wiped out 50% of the cooperation.
And what you've got is tit for tat strategies
are vulnerable to signal error.
That's something that soon came out in these studies
of Axelrod's.
When I was a kid, there was like one of these thriller
books I remember reading where there's a glitch in the system.
And at the time, the mean scary Soviet Union
launched a missile that-- no, it was the United States.
The United States, by accident, launched
a missile, a nuclear weapon, where they didn't mean to.
Some cockroach chewed through a wire some place or other.
And the missile went off, and wound up destroying Moscow.
And oh my god, we had a cooperative system
of mutually restraint of aggression, all of that.
And thanks to a signal error, a cheating signal
was accidentally sent off.
And how did the book end?
A tit for tat response.
In order to avoid thermonuclear wasteland,
the Soviet Union was allowed to destroy New York.
All right, so that shows exactly how
you could then get into a see-sawing thing,
simply by way of if the system has any vulnerability
to signal error.
So it soon became clear, as soon as Axelrod
began to introduce the possibility of signal errors,
that tit for tat didn't work as well as another strategy, one
that quickly came to the forefront.
And that one-- for some strange reason,
that's the way it's shown.
That one was called forgiving tit for tat.
What happens with forgiving tit for tat?
The usual rule, like tit for tat, if you cooperate,
if they cooperate, you always cooperate.
If they cheat against you, you punish them in the next round.
Exactly the same thing as tit for tat,
but oh no, what if there's a signal error in the system
and you've gotten caught in one of these horrible seesawing
things.
What forgiving tit for tat does is,
we'll have a rule, for example, that if we
see saw like this five times in a row,
I will forego cheating the next time.
And instead, I'll cooperate.
And that will get things back on track.
I am willing to be forgiving in one round
in order to re-establish cooperation
after the signal error came in.
And that one-- as soon as you introduce
the possibility of signal error, that one out-competes
tit for tat.
Because it makes perfect sense.
It's a great way of solving that problem.
So that was terrific.
Tit for tat with the ability to forgive,
and what you would then see is variability, how many of these
do you need to go through before you forgive,
what's the optimal number of see-sawings, all of that.
So a whole world of optimizing how soon you're forgiving.
Nonetheless, the general theme being forgiving tit
for tat out-competes tit for tat when you can have signal error.
But there is a vulnerability.
There is a vulnerability here to this one, which
is, you could be exploited.
If you're playing against, for example, a tit for tatter,
or all sorts of other strategies, where
they don't have forgiving strings of defection
and you do, what's going to happen
is you're going to keep going back to cooperating,
they're going to keep stabbing you in your back.
Forgiving tit for tat is vulnerable to exploitation
playing against individual players that
don't have forgiveness in them.
So what soon became apparent was an even better strategy, which
is you start off with a tit for tat strategy.
Which is, you are punitive, you are
retaliatory amid being forgiving, clear and nice
initially.
You are willing to punish, and you cannot be exploited in this
way.
If and only if you have gone whatever number of rounds
without the other individual ever cheating on you, if you've
gone long enough without that happening,
you switch over to forgiving tit for tat.
What is that?
That's deciding you trust somebody.
You've had enough interactions with them
that you are willing to trust them.
This is the transition from pure rational optimizing
to switching over, forgiveness coming in there protects you
from signal error.
And of course, now, a whole world of how many rounds do you
need to do this before you switch that as to what
the optimal deal with that is.
But again, this is a way of transitioning
to solve the problem of signal error,
but forgiving too readily and being taken advantage of.
Soon, another strategy appeared, which was called Pavlov.
And those of you who know Pavlovian psychology
will see that this, in fact, has nothing whatsoever to do
with Pavlovian psychology, and I don't know why they did that.
But they thought it was kind of cool.
But the rule was remember, if you
stab the other guy in the back, you get a bunch of points.
If you both cooperate, you get points, not as many.
If you both cheat, you lose some points.
If you're taken advantage of, you lose a lot of points.
So two outcomes you gain, two outcomes you lose.
In Pavlov, the simple rule is when I do something,
if I get points, if I get some degree of reward,
I do it again the next time.
If I get rewarded in either of the first two types of payoffs,
I do the same thing again.
And the other part, of course, is, if I play my strategy
and I lose one of the two bottom outcomes,
I switch to the other strategy the next time.
And what you see is that can establish very good tit
for tat stuff.
But if you sit and spend hours tonight
with a long roll of toilet paper and playing
out all the rounds of it, you will
see what Pavlov allows you to do is exploit
somebody else who is forgiving.
So Pavlov goes along just fine with this.
And as long as Pavlov continues, whenever they switch over
to a forgiving tit for tat, Pavlov
will out-compete them, because Pavlov exploits.
What then emerged was just zillions of people studying
all sorts of games like this.
There's other ones, ultimatum game, there's a trust game.
It's the same notion of business there,
which is you choose to cooperate, you choose to cheat,
what's the optimal outcome.
There are mathematically optimal outcomes that you can use,
and you run all of it against the computer,
and you get the optimization popping out the other end.
Wonderful.
So there's Axelrod and his buddies using terms
like oh, this strategy will drive
the other one into extinction.
Or this strategy works, but if you program in
that every now and then there could be a glitch,
there can be a mutation, this will be-- they're
using all this biology jargon, obviously metaphorically.
But right around this point, the biologists
look at this, who are just beginning to think
about the social biology stuff.
Formal patterns of optimizing behavior.
And they say whoa, does this apply to the behavior
of real organisms?
Because at this point, it's just economists and computer types
and diplomats learning when to optimize,
all that sort of thing.
Around the time there was a paper published,
somewhat before that.
This is a name nobody is going to know,
lost in history, a guy named Daniel Ellsberg.
Daniel Ellsberg became very famous around 1970,
by he was working in the Pentagon
and he stole thousands of pages of secret files
there, and gave it to the New York Times
showing how utterly corrupt everything that
went on behind the scenes was in getting us into Vietnam.
Major blowout, all of that.
He had spent the early part of his career perfectly happily
working in the Pentagon for the military as a game theorist.
As a game theorist coming up with optimal patterns.
And he wrote one paper called "The Optimal
Benefits of Perceived Madness".
What times do you want your opponent
to think you are absolutely out of your mind
and going to do all sorts of crazy stuff,
and where they wind up cooperating
to keep you from doing that.
The advantages of madness, what's that.
That's systems where things like mutually assured destruction
doesn't work, because you are willing to set it off.
The advantages of madness.
This whole world of people working on it, mathematicians
and war strategists.
And there's the zoologists now looking at this saying whoa,
this is cool.
I wonder if animals behave that way.
And that's when people, now armed with their insights
into prisoner's dilemma and tit for tat,
all this stuff, started to go and study animals out
in the wild and see, were there any examples where
this happened.
Yes.
In all sorts of interesting realms.
First example, vampire bats.
Vampire bats, we are all set up to be creeped out
by vampire bats.
But in actuality, when you see a vampire bat drinking
the blood of some cow or something,
you are watching a mommy getting food for her babies.
Because vampire bat mothers are not actually
drinking the blood.
They're filling up this throat sack thing,
and they go back to the nest and they disgorge
the blood to feed their babies.
She's just watching out for her kids.
It happens that vampire bats have an interesting system
of reciprocal altruism, which is a whole bunch of females
will share the same nest.
Will have all their kids in there mixed in.
And these are not necessarily related,
so we've just left the world of kin selection.
They're not necessarily related, but they have
reciprocal altruists system.
Each female comes in, disgorges the blood,
and feeds everybody's babies.
And they all feed each other's babies,
and everything is terrific.
And they have this blood vampire commune going there.
And they've reached a nice state of stable cooperation.
Now, make the bats think that one of the females
is cheating on them.
Out comes that female flying off to find some blood, and instead
you net her and get a hold of her,
and take some syringe full of air
and pump up the throat sack so the throat
sack is really full and distended,
but there's no blood in there.
You've just pumped air into there.
And stick her back into the nest there.
And she's just sitting there happily,
and the other females are sitting
saying look at her, look at how much blood she's got there.
I can't believe it, because she's not feeding our kids.
She's cheating on us.
And the next time they go out to feed,
the other females don't feed her kids.
A tit for tat.
What you saw here is an exact example
of introducing signal error.
Signal error, in this case, being some grad student
pumping up the throat of some vampire bat
and showing that they're using a version of a tit for tat
strategy.
Totally amazing.
People were blown away by this.
Another example, fish.
Stickleback fish who, in the world of animals-- you know,
bats are probably not some of the brightest folks around.
But I don't think sticklebacks are within light years of them.
But stickleback fish can do a tit for tat strategy.
Here's what you do.
You have a stickleback fish in your fish tank,
and you make the fish believe that he's
being attacked by another fish.
What do you do?
You put a mirror up against the edge of the tank there.
So within a very short time-- I told you
they were not that smart.
So within a very short time, he's
lunging forward at this mirrored thing
and maintaining his territory against this guy
and barely holding on.
And that other guy is just-- he doesn't get tired.
Thank god I don't get tired.
And they're just going at it.
And now make him think he has a cooperative partner.
Put in a second mirror that's perpendicular here.
In other words, he sees his reflection there.
And every time he moves forward, the
sees that one moving forward, which is fortunate
because he's also seeing another fish coming from that way.
And he's sitting there saying, this is great.
I don't know who this guy is, but wow, what a team we are.
[LAUGHTER]
Doubles, this is great.
He's in there and the thing is, it's funny how those two
guys are so synchronized.
But whoa, we're holding them off and we're doing it.
Now make him think his cooperating partner is,
in fact, cheating on him.
Take the mirror and angle it back a little
bit so the reflection is set back some.
And what he now sees is the fish moving forward,
but not all the way up to the wall there.
The fish is hanging back there.
The fish is cheating.
And this stickleback is sitting there saying, in effect,
that son of a bitch.
I can't believe he's doing that to me.
We've worked together for years.
I can't believe he's-- oh he's pretending to go forward.
But I see he's not really doing that.
Fortunately, that guy isn't coming forward anymore, either.
Phew.
But I can't believe the guy is cheating.
And the next time you set up this scenario, the next time
there's a chance the stickleback doesn't attack
its own reflection there.
It is tit for tatting against this guy.
So here we've managed to set up one of these deals
within one fish and carrying it out forever.
One fish, ultimately with some very blistered lips.
Tit for tat, once again.
Another example.
This is the most bizarre one I can imagine, and leads
to all sorts of subjects that are going
to come many lectures from now.
But there are fish species that will change sex.
And they do it under all sorts of strategic circumstances
that suddenly begin to fit into this realm of what
we've been learning about.
And you've got one of these things called black hamlet
fish.
And they can change gender.
So you'll have a pair of them who
hang out with each other of opposite genders,
and they take turns.
They flip back and forth.
For a while, this one's female, and for a while,
this one's female.
And they go back and forth, and that's great.
But there's an inequity there, which
is that the price of reproduction
is greater for the female than for the male.
As is the case in so many species,
the female doing all that egg and ovaduct
and progesterone stuff, or whatever it is.
And the male's just got to come up with some sperm there.
Doing to reproduction as a cooperating pair,
they're not relatives.
Reciprocal altruism, maximizing each of their reproductions.
Whoever's the female in any given round
is the one who's paying more.
What you see are reciprocal relationships there
of the fish using tit for tat.
If you get one fish that begins to cheat and winds up
being a male too much of the time,
the other fish stops cooperating with them.
Again, tit for tat stuff.
So people were just blown out of the water at this point,
seeing whoa, forget rational human economic thinking,
all of that.
You go out into the wild, and bats and stickleback fish
and gender switching fish and all of that,
they're following some of the exact same strategies.
Isn't nature amazing.
No, nature isn't amazing.
It's the exact same logic as saying
a giraffe has to have a heart that's
strong enough to pump blood to the top
of the head of a giraffe.
Or else there wouldn't be a giraffe.
And when you look at this realm, it's applying the same notion.
This same sort of wind tunnel of selective optimization
for behavior-- in this case, when to cheat,
when to cooperate-- sculpts something
that is as optimized as a giraffe's heart
being the right size.
So this made perfect sense.
Wonderful.
But then people began to look a little bit closer,
and began to see the very distressing real world
beginning to creep in there.
Which were exceptions.
First exception.
This was done by a guy named Craig Packer, University
of Minnesota, looking at lions in East Africa.
What you get is, typically, prides
are a whole bunch of relatives, usually female, sisters,
nieces, all of that.
But you will sometimes get prides that
are not of close relatives.
Nonetheless, they will get reciprocal altruistic things
going on.
Lions, in this case, having the same trick as
was done on those vervet monkeys.
Researcher putting inside the bush there a speaker,
and playing the sound of like 400 menacing lions all at once.
What you're supposed to do is freak out at that point.
And all of you need to very carefully approach and see
what's going on in that bush.
So what would happen in a reciprocal system,
and everybody does this.
Or if one time, one of them cheats on you,
you push that one forward the next time.
Or some such thing.
That's what you would expect.
But what he would begin to notice
is, in a bunch of these groups, there'd be one scaredy cat
lion, one who habitually stayed behind the others
and who wasn't punished for it.
So this produced this first puzzle
that oh, sometimes animals aren't optimizing tit for tat.
Sometimes animals haven't read Robert Axelrod's landmark 1972
paper, that sort of thing.
And what you suddenly have is the real world.
What could be possible explanations?
One thing being, maybe they're not really paying attention.
Maybe they're not quite that smart.
Wait, bacteria are doing versions of tit for tat.
What else could be going on?
Oh, lions interact in other realms.
Maybe this individual is doing very reciprocal stuff,
forgiving overly altruistic stuff in some other realm
of behavior.
Maybe this lion eats less of the meat
and backs off earlier, or something like that.
Maybe there's another game going on simultaneously.
And this is introducing the real world
in which it is not just two individuals
sitting there playing prisoner's dilemma and optimizing.
You suddenly begin to get real world complexities coming
in there.
And by the time we get to the lectures,
way down the line, on aggression and cooperation,
what you'll see is things get really complicated
when you have individuals playing games simultaneously.
The rules that you apply to one psychologically
begin to dribble into the other one.
All sorts of things like that.
It will get very complicated.
So a first hint there that, in fact, everything
doesn't work perfectly along those lines.
Here's another version.
Here's one of the truly weird species out there,
something called the naked mole rat.
If you ever have nothing to do and you've
got Google Image up there, go spend the evening looking up
close up pictures of naked mole rats.
These are the weirdest things out there.
They are the closest things among the mammals
to social insects, in terms of how their colonies work.
They're totally bizarre, all of that.
But they live in these big, cooperative colonies
that are predominately underground in Africa.
And they were discovered, I think, only in the 1970s or so.
And for a while when zoologists got together,
if you were a naked mole rat person,
you were just the coolest around.
And everybody else would feel intimidated,
because you were working on the best species out there.
And you would see these big cooperative colonies,
soon shown to not necessarily be of relatives.
And reciprocity and all those sorts of rules.
But people soon began to recognize
there would be one or two animals in each colony that
weren't doing any work.
Work digging out tunnels, bookkeeping,
I don't know what naked mole rats do in terms of work.
But there would be a few individuals who
would just be sitting around.
And they were these big old naked mole rats.
They were much bigger than the other ones,
and they were scarfing up food left and right.
There goes Robert Axelrod down the drain.
There goes all that optimization,
because no one would be punishing these guys.
What's the deal?
And it took enough watching these animals long enough
to see this notion of oh, there's
another game going on in which they
play a more important role.
And it is sort of dribbling across.
When the rainy season comes, these big naked mole rats
go up and turn around and they plug the entry to the tunnels
then.
[LAUGHTER]
That's what they do.
And suddenly, these guys who have
been sitting around doing no work whatsoever all year
and eating tons of stuff, they suddenly have to now stick
their rear ends out for the coyotes to be around
or whatever it is that predates them.
What we have is role diversification.
Real animals, real organisms, are not just
playing one formal prisoner's dilemma game against each other
at the same time.
And by the time we, again, get to the later lectures
on aggression, cooperation, all of that,
we will not only see that things get much more complicated when
you're playing simultaneous games,
when you're playing a game against one individual
while you're playing against another one,
and then against triangular circumstances.
How play differs if you know how many rounds
you are playing against the individual versus
if you have no idea.
How play differs if, when you are
about to play against someone, you
get to find out what their behavior has
been in the previous trials with other individuals.
In other words, if somebody shows up with a reputation,
we'll see this is a much more complicated world
of playing out these games.
A much more realistic one.
So we begin to see a first pass at all this optimization stuff,
and how great that all is.
One final interesting addition to this game theory world
of thinking about behavior like that, which came from a guy
named James Holland, who apparently-- might
have a different first name.
But Holland, apparently, as an interesting piece in history,
he's the person first person to ever get
a PhD in Computer Sciences.
Which I think was in the late 50s, University of Michigan.
Apparently, there are realms of computer programmers
who worship this guy.
And he, like a lot of other folks in that business,
got interested in this game theory evolution
of optimal strategies.
And he designed ways of running all of this.
And he introduced a new ripple, which
is the possibility of a strategy suddenly changing.
The possibility of a mutation.
What he could then study was mutations,
how often they were adaptive, how often they
spread throughout the strategy there, of individuals playing.
How often they drove the other strategies
into extinction versus ones that were quickly
driven to extinction themselves.
More cases where we are getting these systems
where maybe they're not just metaphorically using terms
from biology.
Maybe they are exactly modeling the same thing.
And we will see more and more evidence for that.
OK, so reciprocal altruism.
How would that play out in the world of natural selection.
Natural selection, cooperative hunting.
And there's lots of species that have cooperative hunting.
Wild dogs, jackals, some other species as well.
Clearly, that's like the definition
of cooperative hunting, of reciprocal altruism,
if they're not relatives.
How would sexual selection play out
in the realm of reciprocal altruism?
A little bit less obvious there.
That would be if you and some non-relative
spent an insane amount of energy and time
making sure you both look really good before going to the prom.
That would be sexual selection working on reciprocal altruism
system.
So what we have now are three building blocks.
This whole trashing of it's not survival of the fittest.
It's not behaving for the good of the species.
It's not behaving for the good of the group.
But instead, these three building
blocks, the ways to optimize as many copies of your genes
in the next generation as possible.
Way number one, individual selection,
a version of selfish genes.
Sometimes a chicken is an egg's way of making another egg.
Behavior is just a way of getting copies of genes
into the next generation.
Piece number two, inclusive fitness kin selection.
That whole business, that sometimes the best
way of passing on copies is to help relatives do it.
And it's a function of how related they are.
The whole world of cooperation more among related organisms
than unrelated ones.
And as we will see way down the line, what
is very challenging in different species
is, how do you figure out who you are related to?
And humans do it in a very unique way that sets them up
for being exploited in all sorts of circumstances that
begin to explain why culture after culture, people
are really not nice to thems, and it flows along those lines.
This is something we will get to in a lot of detail.
So degree of relatedness, a lecture coming.
How do you tell who you're related to.
But that second piece, kin selection.
Third piece, reciprocal altruism.
You scratch my back and I'll scratch your back.
And whenever possible, you want to instead scratch your back,
and they want to make sure you're
not scratching your back.
Or whatever cheating counts as.
But trying to cheat, being vigilant against it,
formal games where you can optimize it, very complicated.
And can you believe it, you go out into the real world,
and you find examples of precisely that.
Optimization with tit for tat, isn't nature wonderful.
It's gotta work that way.
Then you begin to see how the real world is more complicated.
Multiple roles, naked mole rats stuck in plumbing,
things of that sort.
These are the principles.
And what people of this school of evolutionary thought
would say, armed with these sorts of principles,
you could now look at all sorts of interesting domains
of animal behavior and understand
what the behavior is going to be like by using these.
OK, we start with the first example.
Here we return to these guys.
And we have one species here, and knowing
this guy had a penis and this one nursed,
we've got an adult male and an adult female.
What is it that you can conclude?
In this species, males are a lot bigger than females.
Let's state it here as there's a big ratio of males to females.
Meanwhile in the next county, you've
discovered another species where somebody's got a penis
and somebody else is nursing.
And their skulls are the exact same size.
Oh, here's a species where there's
no difference in body size between males and females.
Let's begin to see, just using the principles
we've got in hand already, what sort of stuff we can predict.
Starting, which of those species-- in one case,
you have males being a lot bigger than females.
In one case, you've got males being the same size as females.
In which of those species, the first one like this,
or the same size ones, which ones
would you expect to see more male aggression?
First one.
First one.
OK, how come?
Their bodies are built for it.
Their bodies are built for it.
Which begins to tell you something,
their bodies are built for it, maybe
because females have been selecting for that.
You will see higher levels of aggression
in species like this, where there's a big body size
difference, and much less of it in these guys.
Next, you now ask how much variability is there
in male reproductive success.
In one of these species, all the males
have one or two kids over their lifetime.
In another species, 95% of the reproducing
is carried out by 5% of the males.
A huge variability skew in male reproductive success.
Which species do you get the every male has
a couple of kids, and that's about it, and all equally so?
Which one?
[INAUDIBLE]
Second one.
How come?
Because these guys are being selected for aggression.
If they're fighting, there's going
to have to be something they're fighting for.
Deferential reproductive access.
OK, so you see more variability in species that look like this.
Next, females come into the equation.
What do females want?
What do females want in the species on the left
versus the one on the right?
The one on the right, again, skull's
the same size, same body size.
On the left, what does the female want?
[INAUDIBLE]
What sort of male is the female interested in?
[INAUDIBLE]
Big.
Exactly.
That's exactly the driving force on this.
How come?
Because she's not going to get anything else out of this guy.
This guy is just going to, like-- the present
is going to be some sperm.
It might as well be some good sperm, some genetically
well-endowed sperm that makes her a big healthy offspring,
increasing the odds of her passing on copies of her genes
in the next generation.
What about in this species?
What's females looking for?
[INAUDIBLE]
OK, good.
Hold on to that for a second, and let's
jump ahead a few lines.
One of the species, males have never
been known to do the slightest affiliative thing with infants.
They just get irritated and harass them and all of that.
In the other, you have soccer dads
who are doing as much raising of the kids as the females are.
In which species do you get lots of male parental behavior?
Smaller.
The one on the right.
OK.
So lots of male parental behavior here.
Somebody just gave the answer here, female choice.
What would you see in this species?
You want big, muscular guys.
You want whatever is selling that season for what
counts as a hot male, because you want your offspring
to have those traits.
And somebody else called out here,
what do females want in this category?
And what was it you said?
Good personality.
[LAUGHTER]
Good personality.
Yes.
Able to express emotions.
[LAUGHTER]
That, too.
OK, somebody else shouted out something
that gets at the broader, more globally Oprah version.
OK, somebody shouted out--
[INAUDIBLE]
--parental behavior.
You want a male who is going to be competent at raising
your children.
What is it that you want, really most deeply?
You want to get the male who is the most like a female you
can get a hold of.
You don't want some big old stupid guy
with a lot of muscle and canines who's wasting energy on stuff
like that he could be using instead on reading Goodnight
Moon or some such thing.
What you want instead is somebody
who's as close to a female as you can get to without getting
this lactation stuff.
Males are chosen who are the same size as females.
So the term given here is choosing for paternal behavior,
parental behavior.
Parental, let's just put that in there.
And that begins to explain the top line, species
in which there's a lot of sexual dimorphism.
Morphism, shapes of things.
Sexual dimorphism, big difference
in body size as a function of gender.
And in these sorts of species where
you get male parental behavior, not
much variability in male reproductive success,
low levels of aggression, and what
females want is a competent male.
These are ones where you see low degrees of sexual dimorphism.
So how's a female going to figure out
that this guy is going to be a competent parent?
Once again, we just figured out, if he looks kind of like you.
Because that suggests he hasn't wasted health and metabolism
on stupid, pointless muscles when there's
more important things in life for making sure
your kids have good values.
What else would the female want to know when she's first
considering mating with a male?
Is he a nice guy, is he sensitive,
does he express his feelings.
Is he competent at being a parent.
What do you want the individual to do?
Prove to you that he can provide for the kids.
And suddenly you have a world of male birds courting the females
by bringing them worms.
Bringing them evidence that they are
able to successfully forage, they are able to get food.
Female choice is built around appearance
and behavioral competence at being
able to be a successful parent in order
to pass on as many copies of genes
to the next generation as possible.
OK, how about life span.
In which species is there a big difference in life expectancy
as a function of gender?
First one.
First one.
Here you're choosing for males to be
as close to females as possible, and thus the physiology.
Here you've got these guys who are
using huge amounts of energy to build up
all this muscle, which takes a lot more work
to keep in calories.
And you're more vulnerable in famines.
You've got these males with high testosterone,
which does bad stuff to your circulatory system.
You've got males who, thanks to all this aggression,
are getting more injuries, more likely.
In species in which you have a lot of sexual dimorphism
in body size, you get a lot of sexual dimorphism in life span.
Then you look at these guys, and it's basically
no difference by gender.
Moving on.
Considering primates that are one
of these two patterns, in which one do you always
want to give birth to twins, in which one do you never
want to give birth to twins?
Who gives birth to twins?
[INAUDIBLE]
The one of the right, of course.
How come?
Because you've got two parents on the scene.
You are not a single mother.
And you are a single mother rhesus monkey or something,
and you give birth to twins, and you do not
have the remotest chance of enough energy,
enough calories on board, to get both of them to survive.
A twin that is born in a species like this
has the same rate that it occurs in humans, about a 1% rate.
And it is almost inevitable that one of them does not survive.
Meanwhile, there's a whole world of primate species
with this profile where the females always twin.
Finally, you are the female and you
are contemplating bailing out on your kids
and disappearing, because there's
some really hot guy over there who you want to mate with.
And you are trying to figure out this strategy.
So you are going to leave and abandon your kids.
In which species do you see that behavior?
The one on the right.
The one on the right, because you bail out and the male
is there taking care of them.
You bail out in here, and you've lost your investment and copies
your genes for the next generation.
You see female cuckoldry, this great Victorian term.
You see females cheating on the fathers in this species,
but not in species like this.
Because the father is long gone and three other counties there,
courting somebody else.
And it doesn't matter, you're not
going to get any help from him.
In primate species of this profile,
you always see twinning.
And they both survive.
And what studies have shown in these species,
and we'll get to them shortly, is
after birth, in fact, the males are expending more calories
taking care of the offspring, then
the females go bail out on him and go find some other hot guy.
Which, in your species, counts as some guy
who looks even more like you than he does in terms of what
you want out of the individual.
So that.
So what have we done here?
We've just gone through applying these principles
in this logical way, and everybody
from the very first step was getting the right outcome.
And go, and these are exactly the profiles
you find in certain species.
Among social mammals, these would be referred to
as a tournament species.
A tournament species, whereas the one on the right
is referred to as a pair bonding, a monogamous species.
Because in this one, males and females
stay together, because they both have equivalent investment
in taking care of the kids.
All of that.
What you have here is this contrast
between tournament species and pair bonding species.
Tournament species, these are all the species
where you get males with big, bright plumage.
These are peacocks, these are all those birds
and fish species where the males are all brightly colored.
What are the females choosing for?
Peacock feathers does not make for a good peacock mother.
Peacock feathers are signs of being healthy enough
that you can waste lots of energy
on these big stupid pointless feathers.
That's a sign of health.
That's a sign of all I'm getting from this peacock is genes,
I might as well go for good ones.
That's the world of peacocks, that's
the world of chickens with pecking orders,
dominating like that, lots of aggression.
That's the world of primates where, as in savanna baboons,
the male is twice as big as the female.
Tournament species, where a lot of passing on of genes
is decided by male-male aggression in the context
of tournaments producing massive amounts of variability
in reproductive success.
Where males are being selected for being good at this,
so they sure are being selected for having big bodies, which
winds up meaning a shortened life
span for a bunch of reasons.
Females are choosing for that.
These are guys who are not using their energy
on parental behavior, thus you do not
want to have twins if you are a female baboon,
and you do not want to bail out on the kids
because nobody else is going to take care of them.
Go and look at a new primate species,
and see this much of a difference in skull size,
and you'd just be able to derive everything
else about its social behavior.
Meanwhile, these guys on the right, pair bonding species.
These are found among South American monkeys, marmosets,
tamarins.
You put up a picture of them, which
I will do if I ever master PowerPoint
in some subsequent lecture-- you put up
a picture of a marmoset pair, and you can't tell
who's the male and the female.
This is not the world of the mandrill baboons,
with males with big, bright, bizarre coloration on the face,
and with antlers when the females don't,
and that whole world of sexual dimorphism.
You can't tell which one is the male
and which one is the female marmoset by looking at them.
You can't tell by seeing how long they live.
You can't tell by how much they're
taking care of the kids.
You can't tell in terms of their reproductive variability.
That's a whole different world of selection.
All of the South American tamarins and marmosets,
the females always twin.
They have a higher rate of cuckoldry,
of abandoning the kids.
The males take as much care, if not more,
of the kids than the female does.
Very low levels of aggression.
Same body size, same lifespan.
All the males have low degree of variability.
How come?
Because if you're some marmoset male,
you don't want to get 47 marmoset females pregnant.
Because you are going to have to take care of all the kids.
Because as we will see way down the line in lectures
on parental behavior, the wiring there is such
is bonding with the offspring and taking care of them.
No wonder among species like these,
you have very low variability.
All the males reproduce once or twice.
This is the world of 5% of the guys accounting
for 95% of the matings.
This is totally remarkable because again,
that starting point.
You start off here, and you look at these,
and oh, you can tell if they were bipedal and were
they diseased or malnourished, simply by applying
these principles of individual selection, reciprocity,
all of that.
One factoid, you see a new primate species,
and you see one nursing and one with a penis,
and they're the same size or there's difference in the size,
and you already know all about their social system.
Very consistent across birds, across fish, across primates.
Of course, all of those, this dichotomy
between tournament species and pair bonding species.
As we will see way down the line,
among some species, types of voles, rodents,
that are famous in Hallmark cards for their pair bonding,
for their monogamy.
As we'll see, they're not quite as monogamous
as you would think.
But nonetheless, a general structure like this.
So, one asks expectedly, where do humans fit in on this one?
Where do humans fit?
And the answer is, complicatedly.
Are we a tournament species, are we a pair bonding species.
What's up with that?
What we will see is we're kind of in between.
When you look at the degree of sexual dimorphism,
we are not like baboons, but we're sure not like marmosets.
We're somewhere in the middle.
Variability is somewhere in the middle there.
I'm not going near that one.
Life span, the dimorphism in lifespan
tends to be in between.
Parental behavior and likelihood-- all of those,
you look at a number of measures.
And by next lecture, we'll be looking
at some genetics of what a monogamous species
and tournament species look like.
And we're right in the middle.
In other words, that explains like 90% of literature.
Because we're not a classic tournament species and we're
not a classic pair bonding one.
We are terribly confused in the middle there.
And everything about anthropology supports that.
Most people on the planet right now
are in a form of monogamous relationships
in a culture that demands monogamy.
An awful lot of people who are in monogamous relationships
in such cultures aren't really in monogamous relationships.
Traditionally, most cultures on this planet allowed polygamy.
Nonetheless, in most of those polygamous cultures,
the majority of individuals were pair bonded and monogamous.
You get two different versions of polygamy
in different social systems of humans.
One is economic polygamy, which is you're basically
sitting around, and the wealthiest guy in the village
is the one who can have the largest number of wives.
An enormous skew in reproductive success
that's driven by economics.
The other type is demographic.
You have a culture where, for example, you
have a warrior class.
Guys spend 10 years as warriors-- worriers, warriors,
New York City accent.
As warriors, they don't worry.
There's no anxiety.
But they eventually worry about getting a wife,
because by the time they're done being a warrior,
they're like 25.
And they marry someone who's 13, which
is what you see in a lot of traditional cultures
that follow that pattern.
And at that point, you've got a problem,
which is an awful lot of those guys have been killed
over the course of 10 years of being involved
in high levels of aggression and 10 more years of life
expectancy to catch up with you.
There's is a shortage of males.
So you see polygamy there driven by demographics,
and you see polygamy driven by economics
in other types of society.
So most cultures on this planet allow-- traditionally,
before the missionaries got them--
most cultures on this planet allow polygamy.
Nonetheless, within most polygamous cultures,
the majority of people are not polygamous.
We have one really confused, screwed up species here.
Because we are halfway in between in all sorts of these
measures.
OK, so what do we have next, which
we will pick up on Friday.
What we've just started with here
is the first case of using all these principles,
individual selection, kin selection, reciprocal altruism,
to understand all sorts of aspects of behavior.
We will then move on to seeing how
they explain other aspects of animal behavior, some ones
which, if you are behaving for the good of the species circa
1960, there's no explanation at all, because you're
doing things like killing other members of your species.
And then finally, we will see how
this applies to humans and some of the witheringly
appropriate.
 OK.
Let's get going.
Various announcements, procedural things.
A number of people want more information about grading
and what the exams are like, all of that.
I think I mentioned one-third of the points
will come from the midterm, 2/3 from the final.
In terms of the style of the midterm,
the midterm is heavily going to be
about making sure you got down all the factoids
from the first half of the course,
that you've got the basics of each of our proverbial buckets.
The second half of the final is all
going to be about integration, thinking
across the different categories.
So just a sense of that.
Readings.
Readings, as they are coming out,
the books are not required until the second half of the course.
The handout on Monday, I think, said
which chapters of the [? Zebra ?] book
you should read.
We will shortly get to you which chapters of the [? Chaos ?]
book you should read as well.
The readings that are being posted
on the CourseWorks, the downloads of various published
papers, those are required.
I'm clear on those whether this is
a paper you should read all of, if this is one you
should read the abstract of.
Even if you read all of, do not read it
in some obsessive, detail-oriented way.
The goal is probably to be able to say, in one or two
paragraphs, why this paper has something pertinent to say
about the topic they fell into.
You're not sitting there having to memorize techniques,
middle names of the authors, how many animals, anything
like that.
In terms of that, it probably makes sense
to read those after the first lecture of whatever
block there is.
And hopefully, if I get organized,
I'll be able to get you sort of a list of the readings
further in advance than one week in advance.
Nonetheless, you should probably hold off reading it
until after the lecture occurs.
Let's see.
What else?
People wanted to get a sense of how long things
were going to go.
As we'll see today, the evolution lecture topic
will cover two classes.
Molecular genetics, which is what we'll pick up on Monday,
I'm guessing one to one and a half.
Behavior genetics following that, one to one and a half,
ethology one.
Neurobiology, endocrinology, we'll
have one week devoted to intro to the topics.
And again, that's one where this is so important for everybody
to be up to speed rather than these being in catch-up
sections that week.
The whole week, Monday, Wednesday, Friday,
will be devoted to that with the TAs teaching it.
The following week, three more lectures, more advanced ones.
And depending on proximity to the midterm,
there may be a half-lecture in there on statistics,
or maybe not.
So this is going to depend on keeping on schedule.
This is a rough approximation.
The midterm is going to be a Monday night.
You will be responsible for material up to the previous
Wednesday, and there will be lots of review stuff.
Take a look at the extended notes being posted.
What else?
OK.
I think that covers most of the procedural stuff.
All of this stuff will get posted as well.
So picking up on the other day.
What was happening the other day?
Number one, the trouncing of Darwin inventing evolution,
trouncing of survival of the fittest,
probably most importantly, trouncing
of behavior for the good of the species, group
selection-type arguments.
What we saw was, number one, the rationale for the whole thing.
There is a vicious, un-fightable logic
to why hearts have to be the size they are and kidneys
have the filtration rates they have to have
in order to solve the challenges of leaving
as many copies of your genes in the next generation.
And making sense of the evolution of hearts and kidneys
and things like that could be the worlds
of bioengineers and biomechanics folks with an underlying logic
that it's got to be something that
increases the number of copies of genes that you leave.
And the whole rationale for Wednesday's lecture and today
is applying the same sort of logic to behavior.
The whole world of just as you can optimize
sort of the way one's neck, how long it is if you're a giraffe,
you can optimize behavioral strategies.
And again, also for a caveat, no animal
is sitting there, maybe with the exception of some other apes,
sitting there consciously strategizing along those lines.
One saying, so what would you, as this dandelion,
want to do at that point with this ecological challenge,
personifying just to make things easier.
OK.
What we then barreled into were the three major building blocks
for thinking about the evolution of behavior
in the framework of contemporary evolutionary thinking.
Number one, individual selection--
passing on as many copies of your own genes
to the next generation as possible
by way of your own reproducing.
The individual selection-- a chicken
is an egg's way to make another egg.
I've now rehearsed that, so I've got that down right.
The whole notion of behavior as just being this epi-phenomenon
in order to do what's needed to get another copy of the genes
into the next generation.
Building block number two.
Some of the time, the best way to increase the number of genes
you pass on to the next generation
is to help your relatives do so following that logic
of Mendelian relatedness.
And people in the catch-up section, I know,
went over issues of, why is it that you share half your genes
with a full sibling, a quarter with a half sibling, et cetera?
So sometimes the way to maximize is by helping out a relative
to do so with, again, constrained
by this vicious mathematical logic of,
it depends on how related you are to the relative.
And thus, you will gladly lay down your life
for one identical twin, two full siblings, eight cousins.
Off you go.
So the whole notion there of insight into why
social animals the galaxy over are so obsessed
with kinship and relatedness, the whole world
of who counts as an us, who counts as a them
in terms of cooperative behaviors
playing out along lines of relatedness.
Finally, we saw the third piece, which was reciprocal altruism.
You scratch my back, I'll scratch yours.
Many hands make the task less scratchy or whatever.
And what you see in those cases, there
is a whole world in which you don't
have to be related to have cooperation.
And we saw all the domains of that bringing
in the formalization-- biomechanics person
figuring out how strong a leg bone has to be.
A game theorist figuring out within the realm
of social behavior when you cooperate
and when you don't and what sort of strategies.
Game theory, of seeing the prisoner's dilemma
as the building block of that entire field
and seeing all the strategies worked out by mathematicians
and economists and diplomats and seeing which ones optimize
under what circumstance.
And then going and look in the real world
and seeing there's all sorts of animals out there
that have evolved optimization strategies of when to cooperate
and when to defect.
And what we'll get to as a huge, huge issue by the time we get
to the lectures on aggression, cooperation, et cetera is,
well, that's great when you've got a cooperative system going.
How do they ever start?
How do you jump start cooperation in systems?
The evolution of cooperation, that's
something we will get to in great detail down the line.
Finally, what we shifted to was now saying,
great, we've got all these principles in hand here
and our big three building blocks and all of that.
How would it be applied to making sense of animal behavior
out in the real world?
And we left with the examples starting someplace there--
where did it go, yes, that's it-- of us marching through,
know one individual factoid about some species
or other species, know that there's
a big difference between the genders in size
or there isn't, know that there's not
high levels of aggression in males,
know that females always give birth.
Whatever those traits are as we marched through,
using these ideas about individual selection, kin
selection, reciprocal altruism, you
could march through and logically infer
what the social behavior of this particular species
was going to be like, and you would be right.
We saw, for example, in tournament species,
tournament species where you have high levels of aggression
among males, male-male competition for access
to females.
As a result, males tend to be a lot bigger than females.
They are being selected for muscle mass,
secondary sexual characteristics, plumage,
big sharp canines for slashing the other guy.
Bringing up this issue of, in a tournament species,
who does the male want to mate with?
What sort of female are males interested in mating with?
The answer being, anyone who will
mate with them because there's like no cost involved.
All that's involved is no parental behavior, none
of that, the cost of sperm.
And literally, people analyze the relative cost
of sperm versus eggs in tournament species.
Males are dramatically un-choosy as to who they mate with.
In tournament species, males have dramatic variability
in reproductive success-- 5% accounting
for 95% of the matings.
Female choice in a tournament species.
What does a female want out of a male?
She certainly is not going to get good fatherhood out
of the guy.
All she wants are good genes because that's
all she could hope for from the guy.
A whole world of female selectivity
for markers of good genes.
And as we'll see in the sexual behavior lectures,
a whole world of males trying to fake out females
across the animal world, suggesting they
got better genes than they actually do.
So we will come to that.
Then tournament species.
Do you see female abandonment of kids?
Absolutely not, because there's nobody else who's
going to take care of them.
Coupled with that, you see single births
among those species, low level.
High levels of aggression amongst the males,
low levels of parenting.
And males tend to live a lot shorter than females.
And what we saw at the other end,
the pair-bonded species was a completely different picture.
Males are being careful who they're
mating with because the wiring there is you mate,
you take care of the kids.
High levels of male parenting, females
are thus able to abandon them.
Females can have multiple births.
Males are selected to be as close to females
as a male can be.
So there's not a big difference in size.
There's not a big difference in secondary sexual
characteristics.
There's not high levels of aggression.
There's not big differences in lifespan.
Who does a female want to mate with?
Someone who is going to be a competent father.
Thus the whole world of pair-bonded species,
where males court with rituals of coming up with food
and coming up with things of that sort.
So the most striking thing about that was, again,
going back to the two skulls I brought
in, you could know nothing more about that species
other than this is an adult female.
This is an adult male.
And working through the same logic,
you know a huge amount about the private lives of the species
and who's messing around with who in the bushes.
And that's merely by applying these principles.
And likewise saying, here is a picture
of a pair in this species and you
can't tell which one is who by gender, that
tells you a whole world of predictability
at the other end.
So a first example of how much explanatory power
you can get out of this.
And on the website, I will find all sorts
of appropriate pictures of tournament and pair-bonding
species for you to look at.
OK.
So a first round of looking at animal behavior
and seeing how once we got these principles in hand,
individual selection, kin selection, reciprocal altruism,
suddenly an awful lot of stuff makes sense.
Next domain where that's the case.
And this is one that has had a real challenge to the,
"Ooh, isn't nature benign and animals behave
for the good of the species" viewpoint.
This one domain probably proves an individual selection
framework more than anything else out there.
OK.
Back to our inevitable National Geographic specials.
And somewhere at the end of whatever the special is,
about whatever species, at some point they usually
get some narrator with some deep, baritone voice coming
at that stage and saying something like,
man is the only species that kills for pleasure.
Man is the only-- and look at how wonderful and benign
these rosebushes are.
They don't kill.
They don't have war.
Only humans do.
And what occurred, by about the mid '70s or so,
was enough field workers from a different species reporting,
hey, wait a second.
We're not the only species that kills.
And we will see plenty of domains
where that makes sense in the lectures to come.
But one particular version really,
really demanded some rethinking about animal behavior, which
was as follows.
What is one of the universals, whether you start with us
and go all the way down to slime molds?
It's babies are cute.
Everybody likes babies.
Babies are adorable.
You want to take care of babies.
Your eyes dilate as soon as you're around them.
And a longstanding notion that what infants, what babies,
what baby features are about are, among other things, are
means to reduce aggression.
And we will see in the ethology lecture something about that.
That was the standard sound bite forever.
And suddenly, you got field biologists
coming back from studying various species saying,
something's up there, because in my species
I see individuals murdering kids all the time.
Whoa, what's up with that?
Infanticide within a species.
Suddenly, not only are humans not the only species that
kills, we're like not the only one
who goes and kills adorable, little, Disney infants.
Suddenly, all sorts of species popping up
where there was infanticide.
And the huge challenge then became to make sense of this.
This first emerged in the 1970s, studies of langur monkeys
in India by someone named Sarah Hrdy reporting this.
Soon it was reported among lions, some other species
as well.
And the first obvious response to this was, wait,
this can't be because I watch all the wildlife specials.
There's something [? wrong. ?]
Oh, there's some sort of psychopathology going on.
This is not a normal population.
This is not a normal population because they
live close to humans.
There's some disturbance.
There's a toxic waste dump somewhere.
They're not a normal species because you've
got the wrong color socks on as the observer, whatever it is.
And this is not normal.
This is pathological behavior.
But long enough time goes by, and it
becomes clear in all sorts of species,
individuals kill infants.
So what is this about?
You start to look closely, and there's patterns.
There are patterns to it.
The first one being that it tends
to be adult males who kill infants.
The next being, you look closely,
and it's not random who kills who.
It's males killing infants who are
most likely to be the offspring of, you guessed it,
individual selection, most likely to be
the offspring of other males.
Competitive strategies for reducing some other guy's
reproductive success.
So this began to be seen in these species that
had infanticide.
It was male infanticide of kids who
were most likely to be the offspring of other males.
But more patterns popped up at that time, which is,
well, why don't you see that in any social species
where you have competition?
And what wound up being clear after a while is
there's only a certain pattern that you see in species that
have competitive infanticide, which is the average interbirth
interval among females is longer than the average tenure
of a high-ranking male.
What?
Here's what that means.
That means you're some low-ranking guy.
You've been working out in the gym for years on end.
You're finally in the position to boot out the alpha male
and take over the whole group.
And damn, every single female in the group
has a newborn who they're going to be nursing for the next two
and a half years.
So they're not going to be ovulating,
and they're not going to be ovulating
for about three years.
And you're likely to be alpha for only a year and a half
or so, where the length of time, on average, that you are going
to be able to be reproductively active
is shorter than the length of time
that females in your species nurse kids and thus
are not ovulating.
And suddenly, you have this brutally clear logic
that makes perfect sense from everything on Monday, which
is, go and kill the kids.
Go and kill the kids for two reasons.
Number one, by killing the offspring of some other male,
you are decreasing that individual's
reproductive success.
This competition is leaving as many copies of your genes,
et cetera.
Number two, by killing an offspring, the female,
by stopping nursing, will soon be ovulating.
And thus, you see this pattern in langur monkeys,
vervet monkeys, patas monkeys, lions,
mountain gorillas and such, where
it's always this structure.
Competitive infanticide-- a male takes over a breeding group
and goes about systematically trying to kill the infants.
So we've got an enormous violation there of behavior
for the good of the species, and baby animals are cute
and suppress aggression, all that sort of thing.
The clearest demonstration of that is to look at the fact
that one of the species where this goes on
by this vicious sort of logic of competition, this
is one of the species on Earth that is as close to extinction
as you can get-- mountain gorillas.
There's maybe 600, 700 of them are left.
And these are just like stunning animals,
and they are disappearing because of habitat degradation,
and human presence, and civil war
is sweeping through there, and all that sort of stuff.
But also they are facing, I think,
inevitable extinction in a decade or two
because every now and then, a male mountain gorilla will
systematically go and kill the infants around in a group
by this logic.
You can't ask for a much better demonstration of animals
not behaving for the good of the species
or the group-- this individual selection strategy.
So immediately we start applying some rules to this.
Well, when's a circumstance that a male would come into a group
and boot out the previous reproductive male
and take over, and where he wouldn't
be all that fast to try to kill all the infants in the group?
When would a male take over a group
and not be all that thrilled to do this competitive infanticide
strategy?
Any guesses?
When he's a brother.
Yeah.
Part two, individual selection, kin selection.
Kin selection, you don't see the competitive infanticide
if the males replacing are close relatives by exactly
that logic.
So then you begin to see some more elegant stuff going on.
In some cases, in a bunch of species,
instead of males killing infants, what happens
is the presence of a new male causes
females to miscarry, pregnant females to miscarry.
One version of this, and this is seen in wild horses,
the new male in there harasses pregnant females
to the point of them miscarrying.
Same exact logic again.
In a whole bunch of rodent species,
you see something far more elegant.
The new male shows up, and if you were a pregnant female,
the smell of a new male causes you to miscarry a litter.
And the biology that is completely
worked out, going from the olfactory signaling--
and we're going to hear tons about olfactory signaling
in weeks to come-- going from the olfactory system
to release of a stress hormone that
disrupts uterine maturation, and you abort.
Olfaction-induced abortion.
What's up with the female with that?
Why is that a strategy for her to leave
as many copies of her own genes in the next generation?
If this guy is around, she's got a choice at that point,
a choice, again, metaphorically.
She has a choice at that point.
Either she can go through the rest of the metabolic costs
of pregnancy, give birth to these kids,
and then they get killed.
Or at least she can take the lesser of two evils.
[? He ?] spontaneously aborts at that point.
And soon after, she is ovulating and has a chance
again to pass on copies of her own genes.
And this is the whole world of-- you put a male hamster
in with a female who's just had babies,
and he goes and eats the kids.
Oh, it's psychopathological.
It's not psychopathological.
Male hamsters are migratory.
If there are kids there, they're not likely to have been mine.
That's the logical thing.
Females having been selected for if there
is the smell of a new male, miscarry.
And the same logic again extending, the smell
of a new male, unless he's a close relative
of the previous male.
You see the exact same thing playing out there.
Now, all of this, of course, is very sort of male-biased
in terms of this.
These are females sort of making the best of the bad situation.
You're some female langur monkey,
and some new male has come in and is
intent on being infanticidal.
And you've read evolutionary biology also.
What do you want to do to maximize
copies of your own genes in the next generation?
Well, you've got this kid here who you're trying to protect.
Would you protect that child to the point of your being killed?
Probably not.
And you don't see females doing that.
Under what circumstance would a female
be most motivated to defend her child to the point of her
being seriously injured?
Older females, older females who are
less likely to have another child after that.
You're on the scene there, and who else from day one
would be most willing to get injured
in order to protect the kid?
The maternal grandmother, who has no reproductive potential
at that point.
And what you see in these langur monkeys,
the females will defend, not to the point of serious injury.
The older the mother is, the more strenuously she defends,
and the grandmothers defend even more.
Following the same logic here playing out in that way.
But you also have another option,
which is to do something much more clever.
And this is not in the world after you've
given birth, but the world of when you are pregnant.
Because even in these species that
have the competitive infanticide,
the new male was also perfectly happy to harass
a pregnant female.
What have females evolved in a number of primate species?
One of the great, all-time ways of manipulating males.
So you're this pregnant langur monkey,
and in comes this new male.
And you know you're going to go through
like six more weeks of pregnancy,
and they're going to be enormously costly,
and the damn guy is going to kill your kids
as soon as they're born.
And what can you do and all of that?
And you come up with something very clever physiologically.
You go into what is called pseudo-estrus, estrus being
the term for when female primates are ovulating
or sexually receptive, are in heat.
And most primate species give external signs
of when they're ovulating.
There is engorgement of all sorts
of tissues around the vagina and rear end and stuff
that humans don't do.
But they have some of the physiological residues,
of water retention, for example.
So you've got all these external signs of, I am ovulating,
except you're not ovulating because you're pregnant.
You are pseudo-ovulating.
You are going through a pseudo-estrus.
You generate the picture of it.
So what happens at that point with this new guy who's
just shown up, and here's this like four-month pregnant female
who nonetheless looks like she's going through estrus?
Well, these guys sit there then and say, well, well,
that's kind of nice, and they go and mate with her.
And like two and a half weeks later, she gives birth.
And you know what the guy's going to do.
He's going to sit there and say, what's the gestation period
in my species?
[LAUGHTER]
[INAUDIBLE], what is it, like five months or something?
I've been here three weeks, and already she's given birth.
Whoa, what a guy.
[LAUGHTER]
And they fall for it.
They fall for it every time.
Females, by having these pseudo-estrus things,
the males are not infanticidal afterward
when the female gives birth.
So this whole world that initially
makes no sense at all-- oh, my god,
animals killing members of their own species, even babies,
making vicious logic when applying issues
of individual selection and the qualifications
by way of kin selection.
Next example, another one with a similar flavor.
And yeah?
Wouldn't evolution favor a male that he didn't figure it out
that it was his children?
Yep.
And I think probably the most technical, Darwinian way
of explaining that is the well-known propensity of blood
flow to either go to male brains or penises.
[LAUGHTER]
They just get impulsive at that point.
They don't stop to think and get the gynecology textbook.
That there no doubt is an advantage
for the tiny subset of male langur monkeys
who can actually be like prudent at that point
and think through the logic.
It works with males.
They fall for it.
Suggesting that a lot of what's going on there
is not a conscious, cognitive strategy.
And this is sort of not a facetious answer, when
by the end of next week, we get to looking at,
how do animals recognize individuals?
With a lot of species, there's not a cognitive strategy.
You're not able to sit there and figure out, wait a second,
this isn't making any sense.
No.
I mean, like not that logically figure it out,
but [INAUDIBLE] just favor the males
that, for any reason, whether they figure it out,
they just feel like [INAUDIBLE] three weeks instead
of five months [INAUDIBLE].
I think what it is is that there's not
a whole lot of males there who could make sense
or who have been selected for making sense of the fact
that mating has something to do with babies down
at the other end of things.
I think there's not been much selection for being
able to cognitively do that.
Or to have some sort of rule-- if I mate with this individual,
any time she produces a baby, I'm
going to be unaggressive to the baby,
unless it's within this sort of time span.
I think that's a little too much, too fast, [? too ?]
evolved in sort of a primate system.
The males fall for it.
Another version with a lot of the same logic.
And this became clear-- studies of baboons, Savannah baboons,
in the early '60s, which is you would
have some male, who male was having
a tension with another adult male.
And they're about to have some sort of clear fight,
and one guy is obviously low ranking,
and he's going to get trounced.
And here comes the big, high-ranking male,
and this guy is terrified.
And what does he do?
He looks around frantically and grabs a baby
and holds it to his chest.
1950s National Geographic special.
Why is he doing that?
Because infants are comforting, because babies are cute.
And everybody becomes less aggressive
when there's a baby around, because oh, my god,
who would attack somebody holding an infant?
What if the infant's injured?
OK.
So that's the old version.
So applying some contemporary interpretations,
what you wind up seeing, along comes the threatening male.
The subordinate male grabs an infant and holds it.
And what you only begin to see after a while of studying
individuals is, it's not random which infant he grabs.
And you know exactly what's going
to come next, a very similar theme
to the competitive infanticide.
When males are doing "kidnapping" like this,
and that is the term to use, they're
not randomly grabbing kids.
They're grabbing kids who are likely to be
the offspring of that male.
And it is very clear at that point, mess with me,
and your kid's going to get it.
And it's clearly not being played out
in any sort of conscious level like that.
But what you see is, it's not random.
And it comes with the sort of qualifiers
that show you even more how the system is working.
So you've got some guy who's a big, high-ranking male
and has obviously fathered all sorts of kids in the troop.
And you're about to trounce this smaller
guy who grabs one of the kids who's more likely to be his
than yours.
Logical competitive strategy of essentially blackmail.
You've got a big, high-ranking male
who's dominating everybody else, except he only
joined the troop two weeks ago.
In other words, there's not been enough time
for him to have kids yet.
When he is threatening lower-ranking guys,
they're less likely to kidnap against him
than kidnap against the high-ranking male
with a long residency.
And what you find even more interesting,
which throws you into this world of, well,
are these guys consciously thinking about this,
or do they just smell that that kid is that guy's kid,
and do they just know?
In primates, they're thinking about it.
And the way to realize that is when they
screw up and make a mistake.
And this one, sort of years ago I was watching some baboons,
and there was this low-ranking guy.
He was actually middle ranking, and this high-ranking guy
was coming at him.
And he was a middle-ranking guy who critically was on his way
down.
He used to be a high-ranking guy.
He was aging.
In other words, he used to be reproductively active.
In other words, there's some of his kids around in the troop.
So he's sitting there, and here comes
this terrifying, high-ranking male who's coming at him.
And our guy gets all agitated, nervous, looks around,
and he grabs a kid, and it's likely to be his kid.
He's grabbed his own kid.
Oh, my god, you're sitting there saying,
I'm never going to get a damn thesis out of this.
These animals just ruined all the theoretical models.
He's grabbing the wrong kid.
So he's holding the kid there, and you're sitting there.
And you could see the guy's about five steps away, and he--
so he tosses the kid in the air--
[LAUGHTER]
--just as he's attacked.
You will see they act as if they have made a mistake.
They are consciously working around something like this.
So this whole notion of coercive blackmail and kidnapping,
again, it only makes sense once you
begin to see the structures of individual selection, kin
selection, reciprocal altruism.
Another example, and this one makes perfect sense instantly.
You look at the world of female primates
in lots of different species, and there's ranking systems.
There is a hierarchy.
And what's the hierarchy built around?
You get a rank one below that of your mother.
You inherit your rank.
Your mom is the alpha female.
You're her first daughter, so you're number two.
And as soon as she has another daughter,
your kid sister is number three, until you
have a first daughter, who pushes your kid sister down
one step.
In other words, dominance hierarchies
amongst the females are entirely nepotistic.
Whoa.
How can you explain that?
Part number two, kin selection.
Dominance systems in all sorts of social species
are built around the nepotism of relatedness.
So that makes sense.
Next one, next interesting notion here,
which is one of those choices, one of those choices
that are not conscious choices.
But you're about to get pregnant,
and you have a choice, as whatever species you are,
do you want to have a male or a female,
or do you want to have a litter of males or females,
or do you want have a litter that's predominantly
male or predominantly female?
And it comes down to an issue now of two things, which
is, how much does it cost to have a female versus a male
during pregnancy?
And what are the reproductive probabilities
of having a male versus a female?
Back to this issue.
You are in a big tournament species.
And as we saw, there's high degrees of male variability
in reproductive success.
5% of the guys are accounting for 95% of the matings.
So you sit there, and what you've got
is a rule that if you go for a son-- like 90% of sons running
around there are never going to reproduce.
And you hit the jackpot and you have the 5% at the very top,
and each of them are going to like father
30 different kids, going for males in a tournament species
is a big gamble.
It's a risky move.
Going for a female, however, there
is no female primate out there who
has 420 kids because she lays eggs like a salmon.
Most females there, unless they have some fertility problem,
they all have something roughly one to five kids
or so over the course of the life of an old-world primate.
So female variability is way down.
In other words, what's a conservative strategy
to pass on copies of your genes?
Have a daughter.
What's a riskier strategy?
Have a son.
And what that immediately predicts is two things.
Number one, you look in dominance hierarchies,
and the prediction is that females who are high ranking
should show more of a tendency towards having sons
than daughters.
And females who are low ranking, exactly the opposite.
And that's what you see in a bunch of primate species
that have this sort of structure.
Next prediction.
You should then predict that when ecological circumstances
get tough, when times are tough, you
want to go for the offspring that costs less.
A female fetus is less calorically
demanding than a male fetus.
Male fetuses cost more to bring to term than females do.
The prediction should be, during times of ecological pressure,
the percentage of females being born should increase.
And as a measure of the fact that males
are more expensive as fetuses, something
like 53% of fertilizations in humans
are males, about a 53% to 47% ratio.
And over the course of pregnancy,
the cost, the increased metabolic vulnerability
of male fetuses, are such that by the time birth comes around,
it's around 51-49.
And it's not until adolescence that it flips over
to the typical pattern of female dominance.
You've got to have more male fetuses
to start off with because they are more expensive, more
vulnerable.
So this prediction during times of ecological duress,
you should get a bias towards more females
being born, the 50/50 ratio skewing in that direction.
And that's precisely what you wind up seeing.
And you see all sorts of examples of this.
In humans, for example, during periods of famine,
food deprivation, the ratio of births skew towards females.
What you also see as a measure of that is among humans,
a boy, giving birth to a boy, statistically decreases
the body weight, is likely to decrease the body
weight, of the next offspring.
It's expensive having one of those males.
And what you wind up getting, then,
is fluctuation as a function of your dominance rank.
If you're high ranking, it's almost always
worth the gamble to go for one of those high-risk, high-payoff
boys.
If you're low ranking, go for the far more conservative
female.
You've got this fluctuation around this 50-50 ratio.
And this was something worked out
by one of the sort of founding figures
[? just through ?] modern evolutionary thinking--
a guy named Robert Trivers in the 1970s,
sex ratio fluctuation as a function of social context.
And people have gone and looked, and it's precisely this.
And you get an interesting bit of conservatism
in this, though, which is there's some circumstance where
it makes perfect sense for you to have a gazillion
daughters because that's the time to do it.
And at some point, you're having a gazillion daughters,
and everybody else is having a gazillion daughters.
And suddenly, males become really valuable because there's
not a whole lot of them around.
So the logical thing to do then is
to switch over and start having males.
And everything else being equal, after a while,
with a predominance of males, it's going to make
sense to switch over to females.
You have density-dependent selection you will always
have oscillating around 50%.
Whichever sex is in the smaller number,
that one is immediately more preferable.
Poor ecological conditions pushes you this way.
Dominance rank push you one way or the other.
But in any of those circumstances,
you have an oscillation around the mean.
Whichever is more common is less desirable.
So sex ratio fluctuation.
More stuff.
Role of kinship, for example, in vervet monkeys.
We talked about that the other day.
Play the sound, an infant alarm call,
and the mother gets all agitated,
and everyone else looks at the mother.
They know that she is the mother.
Sort of demonstration of awareness of kinship there.
Now, another very interesting social structure
to some species, which is we've seen all of these tournament
species.
You have one high-ranking male mating with lots of females
and all that sort of stuff and polygamous systems.
What about polyandry-- circumstances
where a female is mating with multiple males?
What about circumstances of stable polyandry,
where you get, in effect, the inverse of a harem?
You get a single breeding female with a number of males?
And what is seen with a very, very high predominance
is when polyandry occurs, you get a type which
is called adelphic polyandry.
And the second I tell what it is,
it will make perfect, wonderful sense.
OK.
Two male lions sharing a pride?
That's like not what you're supposed to see.
It's one male lion, and Mufasa and his, like, brother
gets pushed out of there.
And like, that's not what you see
when you study Disney lions.
There's supposed to be only one male
is the breeder in the pride.
And occasionally you see these prides
where instead there were two males.
How can they pull that off?
They should be doing competitive infanticide, all of that.
Who were the two males?
Yes, you guessed it somewhere up there before.
It'll be two brothers.
When you see cases of two male lions sharing a pride,
or flip the other way, when you see
a pride being willing to tolerate two males in there
instead of one, very, very high likelihood
that they are brothers.
This technical term-- "adelphic polyandry."
And you wind up seeing one totally wild example
of this in humans.
As I went over the other day, looking at our humans,
tournament species, [? the ?] pair bonding.
We're somewhere stuck in between.
We're terribly confused.
What you see is most cultures traditionally allow polygamy,
but most people are not actually polygamous, all of that.
And somewhere in there, you got to ask the same question.
Hey, is there any polyandry going on with humans?
And there is one wild cultural example of this.
And this is seen in traditional Tibetan society,
and there you get adelphic polyandry.
You have the following structure in rural areas.
A woman will marry a man.
And in the process, she will marry
him along with all of his brothers, all his brothers.
She marries the entire lot of them.
It is adelphic polyandry.
And you see that.
And like it's down to the point where
here's this woman with her husband
and his younger brother and his younger brother,
all the way down to this infant that she's
holding, who's the youngest brother who's
now one of her husbands.
And that's what you see.
What's the explanation for this?
This is a pattern that you get in agriculturally
very impoverished areas where you got a problem.
You've got five sons or whatever.
And with a pattern of land inheritance
where you would otherwise split up the land amongst the five
sons, that's going to put each of them
below subsistence level.
What you need to do is have a way in which they
remain as one reproductive unit so you don't split up the land.
You see this adelphic polyandry, a woman marrying
this whole bunch of brothers.
And it's in circumstances where it's
trying to keep the small farm plots from being broken up.
But again, the logic there is the same
as you see in lions with two brothers sharing a pride.
What else?
Now, somewhere in there, you begin
to get in a realization that not only do
you have males competing with males for reproductive success
and females with females, but there's
intersexual competition.
How could this be?
How could a planet that comes up with Valentine's Day
have intersexual competition?
What is obvious is the reproductive interests
of any given individual may not be
exactly the same as the individual
she or he mates with.
What would be an example of this?
Here you have a species in which males are migratory.
It's a tournament species.
A male shows up during a mating season, lots of aggression,
lots of secondary sexual whatever.
And he mates with a female, and she has kids.
Hooray.
They have parented an offspring, and they've shared their genes
and increased their reproductive success.
Except this being the species, this guy
is going to pack up and leave the next day.
In other words, he has no investment
in the future reproductive health of that female,
whereas she sure does.
She would be delighted for this offspring
to thrive and prosper, but perhaps not at the cost
of her future reproduction.
What we see here is, between the male and the female,
different reproductive strategies.
And this opens up a whole bizarre world
of intersexual competition.
Here's one really bizarre manifestation of this.
OK.
Basic Mendelian genetics.
Those of you who got the catch-up this week
should have a vague sense of this
by now, Hardy-Weinberg ratios.
You've got one parent has one genotype,
just to distinguish the parents and changes the colors there,
all of that.
What is it that isn't bothered with from day one when you
learn these sorts of things?
It doesn't matter which one is the male
and which is the female, which is the father
and which is the mother.
This is just one of them contributes
this profile, one that.
What pops out the other side?
Basic Mendelian genetics.
When making sense of pedigrees, it
doesn't matter which parent is contributing
the homozygotic profile, the heterozygotic.
It doesn't matter which parent.
But then, there is a whole world of genetic traits
where, in fact, it does matter which parent it comes from,
because the same combination of alleles
will function differently whether it came from the mother
or from the father.
And this was a field that sort of emerged in the early 1990s,
and these are called imprinted genes, imprinted genes.
These are genes where, for our purposes to define them,
these are genes which have different manifestations,
different phenotypic consequences.
These are genes that work differently depending
on which parent they came from.
Mendel rolling in his grave.
This is not how it's supposed to work.
This obscure world of imprinted genes violates this.
They work differently depending on which parent
you get it from.
Dramatic foreshadowing-- when we get to the ethology lecture,
the word "imprinting" is going to come up again
in a totally different sense.
This is a purely molecular term right now.
OK.
So you get imprinted genes, imprinted genes.
People began to figure this out in the '90s,
that, wait a second, we've got a completely different profile
in these individuals with a mutation
and a particular disease.
Here we have these two very different diseases,
and they turn out to have the exact same mutation
in the same gene.
What's up with that?
If you get that gene from this parent, you get this disease.
If you get it from that parent, you get that disease.
Totally boggling, making no sense at all.
First thing to have to be solved.
What's a mechanism for actually making a gene work differently
depending on which parent it comes from?
For those who care about these sorts of details,
it's a biochemical process called methylation.
You methylate the gene in one parent's genome and not
the other.
Don't worry about the details.
The main way is there is a genetic mechanism for making
genes work differently depending on which parent it comes from.
So OK, we know how to do it.
Why should this happen?
Why does this make any sense?
And it took a while, and people began to see patterns to this.
And finally this was put together
by an evolutionary biologist at Harvard
named David Haig in the early '90s, who
came up with a unifying theory which explains it all.
And it's very cool.
Here's what you see.
You begin to look at imprinted genes.
And for our purposes, the way we can describe them
is, this is a gene where if you get it from one parent,
it does what it's supposed to do.
If you get it from another parent, it's silenced.
It never works.
It's methylated into silence.
These are imprinted genes.
So he began to notice something.
When you look at imprinted genes where
they are active if they come from the father,
they all tend to be genes that promote fetal growth.
They're all genes that increase fetal metabolism.
They're all genes that make for a thicker uterus.
They're all genes driven by hormones coming out
of the fetus.
They're all genes that push for greater fetal development.
And then you look at the imprinted genes coming
from the female, and they're all genes
that tend to slow down fetal development.
What have we got here?
We've got that intersexual competition played out
precisely there.
You've got this male hamster who's
going to mate and never be seen again
because he's in this category.
And what does he want?
He could care less what happens to the future reproductive
success of this female.
He wants this offspring of his to survive.
The male imprinted genes push for greater amounts
of fetal growth.
And the female ones saying, well, that'll
be great if this kid survives, but I also
have a future reproductive life to think about.
Her imprinted genes tend to counter it.
What would this look like?
One of the imprinted genes, first ones identified,
which comes [? from ?] active from the male, codes
for a protein called insulin-like growth factor.
Who cares what insulin-like growth factor does?
What's clear from the name is it's a growth factor.
It's one of those things that make fetuses grow more.
It promotes fetal growth.
And then meanwhile, the female hamster
has a cognate, an opposing imprinted gene.
What's that one for?
That codes the gene for the insulin-like growth factor
receptor.
And what her version does is make
for a less responsive receptor.
The male was pushing for more of the insulin-like growth factor.
She gets a receptor that's not as responsive.
And you literally have this co-evolutionary arms race
there of male imprinted genes evolving to push
for more and more fetal growth.
Female ones pushing for less and less fetal growth.
And you see that coming out most apparently
when you see mutations in some of these genes.
For example, another pair of imprinted genes, one
from the father, one from the mother,
and what you see there is the father's version
promotes invasion, placental invasion, into the uterus.
And that's actually the term that
gynecologists use, invasion of the fetus
into the uterine wall.
It promotes more of that.
The female version slows it down.
So what if you have a disease where
the male gene relevant to this is mutated and knocked out
of action?
You solely have the female input,
which is decreasing fetal implantation into the uterus.
What have you got then?
You've got a disease where fertilized eggs don't implant.
On the other side, suppose there's
a mutation in the female part of this pairing.
And as a result, all you have is the male input
driving for more and more aggressive fetal invasion.
What do you have?
You wind up with one of the all time bad cancers
you don't want to get, choriocarcinoma,
a cancer of the uterus, because it's
growing completely out of control
being prompted by the fetus.
When you take out each of the voices through a mutation,
you see that normally you're having
this tilting, this balancing, of competition between males
pushing for more fetal growth at the expense
of the future reproductive success of the female, females
trying to slow it down.
All of the imprinted genes show this.
Amazingly, people now have even identified imprinted genes
that don't work until after birth,
and they work in the brain.
And what do they do?
The male-derived one does things like make for infants
that suckle more.
Ooh, get more calories out of mom.
And the female version tends to blunt
some of the suckling reflexes.
It's all built around the strategy of males and females
do not necessarily have exactly overlapping
reproductive strategies.
So another version of it is one--
a male gene which is pushing towards expression
of the fetal enzyme fetal lactogen, placental lactogen.
And what that does is it makes it easier for the fetus
to grab sugar out of the bloodstream from the mother,
and the mother tries to counter it.
And if she's not very effective at doing it,
or if she's rather over-effective,
you get pregnancy hypoglycemia, pregnancy diabetes.
Suddenly, this is mom having a fight with her offspring
over how much calories they're going to get,
the offspring being driven by an imprinted gene from the father.
Totally cool, totally interesting.
There should be a problem lurking here, though,
which is this is a pattern you only see in tournament species.
You got a pair-bonding species, and there's
no reason why a male should be saying something like, ooh, I
want to like ruin her future reproductive success
at the cost of her giving birth.
I'm a pair-bonding vole, and I want
her to give birth to a child the size of an elephant
who's going to survive, and who cares about her future?
They're pair bonding.
They're in it together for the rest of time.
You don't find imprinted genes in pair-bonding species.
You find imprinted genes in tournament species.
And thus, we get back to that same issue
the other day looking at tournament versus pair.
Where do humans fall into this?
And what we've already seen is, if humans can come up
with choriocarcinomas and things like that,
we have imprinted genes.
Same punchline again as the other day--
in terms of the number of genes we
have puts us somewhere in between tournament
and pair-bonding species.
Again, we are terribly confused.
OK.
Let's take a five-minute break, and we will pick up
with more examples.
OK.
Let's get going again.
Two good questions just now.
One is, where does homosexuality fit into all of this?
And where it fits in is about 30 minutes
worth of the sexual behavior lecture sometime in mid-May.
It is a challenge for some of this thinking.
The second good question was, am I capable of speaking louder?
I will try.
I mumble.
OK.
Pushing on.
So we've just brought in this whole bizarre, unexpected world
of trashing the Hallmark cards of intersexual competition.
Another example of it, a really interesting one.
This was work done by a guy named
William Rice at Santa Cruz over some years looking
at a number of different fly species.
Female flies are polyandrous.
They mate with a lot of different males.
And you're a male.
You've just mated with a female.
And what you would like more than anything
in order to pass on copies of your own genes
is, like, not have some other guy impregnate
her, some other male fly guy who's intimidating you.
Not have some other guy do it.
And suddenly, what you see is this interesting world where,
because of the mating frequency of the females,
she will have sperm from a number of different males
inside her at the same time.
And suddenly, we get this very strange world, a whole field
of research, of sperm competition-- sperm
competition of [? regal A teams, ?]
and gold medals and all of that, of sperm
competing with the sperm from other males.
And what you see is, in fly species, the sperm of males
make toxins that kill the sperm of other males.
Whoa.
That's very elegant.
That's very elegant because it, in part,
requires you to come up with a toxin that
isn't toxic to yourself.
You can solve that.
All sorts of molecular tricks for doing that.
But this makes wonderful sense.
You increase the likelihood of you, the sperm,
reaching the goal line and killing
the other guys and all of that.
Except there is a problem for the females,
which is these toxins that the male sperm
release aren't such a hot deal for the female's health.
And what Rice did with these really interesting studies--
I won't go into the details of it, in large part
because I still don't understand what the guy did.
But he was able to somehow take populations
of male and female flies, and he would hold the females
so that they could not evolve in response to whatever
was going on with the males-- male-male competition
for reproduction-- while he held constant the female-female
competition.
The females were not evolving.
The males were.
And what he saw over the course of 30 generations
was this male-male sperm competition
was such that the male sperm were making
such powerful toxins that they were shortening the life
expectancies of the females.
Whoa.
That's not smart.
Whoa.
That makes perfect sense.
House flies are not your pair-bonding swans
dying in each other's arms for life sort of organisms.
It's a classic case of the male only has
an investment in the current reproductive bout.
And if he can wipe out the competitor's sperm
and, oh, bummer, the female has now
got all sorts of rotty necrotic lesions in her vagina,
this is not a very reproductively effective female
fly down the line.
What do I care?
I'm off to the next pile of cow dung after that.
You have that same structure there,
but this is a bummer for the females.
The males, left to their own competition,
will evolve more and more toxic sperm,
which exacts more and more of a price
on the future reproductive success of the females.
Now Rice flips things.
And now he takes these populations,
and he holds the male evolution constant
and allows the females to evolve.
And over the course of 30 generations,
they have evolved a means of detoxifying the sperm.
So here we have male-male competition inadvertently being
played out in an intersexual realm
as well, where, again, this co-evolutionary arms race--
totally bizarre.
Sperm killing each other, and sperm damaging the female.
And that makes no sense if you do for the good of the species.
Again, very logical in the context of these models, these
models of evolution.
OK, final example.
And here's one that will become very relevant way down the line
when we're are looking at things like the biology of aggression.
So you've got these social primates.
And in lots of social mammals, you've
got this pattern, which is one of the genders picks up around
puberty and moves to another group.
It's to avoid inbreeding and everybody having six fingers
and tails, if you're a species that doesn't have a tail,
and is perfectly logical.
And what you need is just some sort of [? pattern-- ?]
is that the females or the males of the species which disperse?
And no one among the primates has ever
found a good rule for which primate species have
female exogamy or male exogamy, which gender leaves at puberty.
But there's variability in chimps.
It's the females who leave at puberty.
In gorillas, it's the females who leave at puberty.
In baboons, macaques, a few other Old World monkeys,
it's the males who leave at puberty, with a very critical
implication.
So you've got baboons.
Baboons-- you've got the troop, and you look at the adult males
and adult females in there.
The adult females grew up in that group.
The adult males grew up someplace else
and emigrated into here at puberty.
In other words, among the adult females in this group,
they're all relatives.
Among the males, there's no relatives.
Meanwhile, next door with the chimps,
it's the females who have left at puberty.
You look at the mature animals in the group,
and it's the males who were there with all the relatives
who have been there all their life,
and the females who have no relatives.
So asking a question.
Comparing baboons and chimps, which of those species
has higher levels of male-male aggression within the group?
[INAUDIBLE]
Baboons, yeah, because they're all brothers
and brothers-at-arms in the chimp group there.
And none of the adult males in baboon troops
are typically related to each other.
Very high levels of intramale aggression intragroup.
So which species, on a certain level,
has put us to shame when it comes
to the invention of warfare, of fighting between groups?
Chimps, because you've got bunches
of males who cooperate because they are relatives.
And what you wind up seeing with chimps--
and we will eventually get to this--
is you see things that are now termed "border patrols," where
a bunch of males from a group will patrol
the edge of their territory.
If they encounter a male from the group over there,
they will attack.
They will kill him, as documented by Jane Goodall.
Taken to an extreme, the males of one group
will eradicate another group.
And if the rule is, I am killing this guy,
we are killing this guy, not because we
don't like the look on his face, but because he
is a member of that group, this is the United Nations
definition of genocide.
Chimps have not only come up with organized warfare
between groups, they have come up
with a chimp version of genocide.
What's the driving force on that?
One of the truly scary things on this planet, which
is when all the males living next door
are getting along with each other.
Because when they do, they suddenly
start looking over at this side.
Organized males driven by female exogamy in chimps
is where the warfare pattern comes from.
And as you can guess, when we get
to thinking about the biology of aggression with humans,
we are suddenly in this world of taking non-relatives
who were military recruits and convincing
them to pseudo-kinship themselves
into being a band of brothers, increasing the sense of kinship
there.
Chimps do this all on their own.
So now making sense of which primate species have
high levels of male-male aggression
within group versus between group, between group
are ones where it's the females who leave at puberty.
All these guys have been together
since they were terrorizing other kids in kindergarten.
They're an organized group against each other.
You get intergroup organized conflict in primates
that have female exogamy, females leaving at puberty.
OK.
So we've now worked our way through a bunch of examples
here and how to apply individual selection,
kin selection, that sort of thing.
A fourth branch has come into the field in the last decade
or so.
And this is one that has had a lot of controversy, in part
because what it is built around is mistaken by a lot of folks
as being an outdated concept.
But in part because what it is actually implying
is very controversial in some realms.
And this is this business of group selection
somehow sneaking back in the back door
there and becoming relevant to the evolution
of social behavior.
Group selection.
You remember Wednesday.
All the wildebeests there, and the elderly wildebeest
pushes his way forward and distributes his bank account
and then leaps into the river and the crocs and all of that.
And that makes no sense at all because animals don't behave
for the good of the species.
In individual selection, he got pushed in.
Nonetheless, a notion of group selection
has come back into thinking, but it occurs only under a couple
of specialized circumstances.
The version that we just trashed, which was the version
Marlin-- OK.
How many of you guys know who Marlin Perkins was?
It's come to that.
Marlin Perkins.
How many of you guys know what-- does Mutual of Omaha,
does that still exist?
Mutual of Omaha's Wild Kingdom?
Is that still a television program?
Yes, no?
When you were young did that exist?
Yeah.
OK.
Is it still sponsored by Mutual of Omaha?
They still do.
That's great, OK, because that one has been
going for decades and decades.
And they'd somehow always have to segue to Mutual of Omaha
in there doing the commercials, building it
like, just as rhinos will mate on for hours on end,
you want fire insurance for your home or some such thing.
But in its original couple of decades,
it was hosted by a guy named Marlin Perkins,
and Marlin Perkins taught most of America
their evolutionary biology.
Marlin Perkins is the guy who taught everybody
behaving for the good of the species and that sort of thing.
The first version of group selection that got
trashed in the '60s was Marlin Perkins' group selection.
The group selection that's sneaking back into the field
is very different, two different versions.
First one, something you will get in various populations.
You've got a population of something or others,
and some biogeographic event occurs,
which causes a subset of them to get isolated
from everybody else.
A land bridge disappears, or somebody drops a lake
there, or who knows what.
But something isolates a small subset of the population.
So these guys go about reproducing by their standards,
and these guys go about reproducing by their standards.
And what's going to be a characteristic very
soon of the smaller population, they're
going to be more inbred than this population
simply because they're smaller.
They're going to have a higher degree of relatedness
among individuals.
So now we throw our second piece of our three building blocks,
throw in kin selection.
And what that immediately predicts
is levels of cooperation will be higher in this group
than in this group, because the higher degree of relatedness.
That's great.
And that's great because once we see
how these sort of cooperative systems have a larger payoff,
you will get a crystallization so that everybody,
the second or third cousins, are eventually
going to have to be just as cooperative as the siblings are
with each other.
You are going to fix a trait of cooperation
in that population at a high rate.
So notice here, in this case, we have a high degree
of cooperation driven by kin selection,
whereas these guys are going about their usual "savage
at each other's throats" business.
Biogeographic event reverses, and these guys
get reincorporated into the main population.
And they're so different by then that they
get a different color.
And what you've got then is, here in the large population,
here is a nucleus of animals who are cooperating,
and here is the huge, unwashed mass of the ones who are not.
And everything we know about reciprocal altruism,
all of that, means that these guys
are going to start out-competing these guys.
And the model that is used is cooperation
will have to crystallize outward.
Animals will have to join in in these cooperative patterns
because these guys will outcompete them.
What do we have?
This is called a founder effect.
This is a small population that, thanks to being inbred,
has fixated some trait that's advantageous.
[? Where ?] the evolution here moves faster than
in here because of the smaller population with the inbreeding,
some adaptive trait comes in there.
They get re-induced into the main population,
and this founder-driven trait quickly
spreads throughout the population.
And what you get here is, if the same thing is occurring
in the realm of behavior, reciprocal, cooperative
behavior, somewhere in here you have a transition
from this being a kin selection phenomenon
to this being a reciprocal altruism phenomenon.
So that stands as one of the models out there for,
how do you jump start cooperation
in non-relative populations?
You use inbred founder populations to drive it there.
And just to have a metaphor, all you need to do,
think about in some city there's some occupations,
some mercantile something or other, that there's
a gazillion of them, and all sorts of people work in that.
And there's a subgroup of people there
who work in this who are all related.
And as a result, they do something cooperative
and kin selective.
They make low-interest loans to each other.
And as a result, they're more successful at business,
and they get incorporated into here.
And what you then have is this economic force
that everybody else has to join in
to this cooperative business of trusting each other,
or low-interest loans, or I trust you like a sibling.
You don't have to pay me in full next week.
Used to be that only siblings trusted
each other like siblings.
But a force there for more cooperation,
a driving force of inbred kin selection initially.
So that's one way in which people are
thinking about group selection.
And here you now have this group out-competing
this because of this trait.
And people actually use terms like "crystallization."
The trait of cooperation will crystallize outward and fix
in the whole population.
So that's one version of it.
And this is one, again, we will come back to,
this is one of the ways to jumpstart cooperation
in a world in which there is no reciprocal altruism.
Because you see the problem with that.
We all have learned tit for tat is the best
one, except [? forgiving ?] tit for tat
might be better, except Pavlov might even be better.
And all of those who built around this one requirement,
though, which is somebody has to make the first move
of being cooperative.
That's got to jumpstart the system.
And what we all know is, in a system
that doesn't go along with the rules of can't we all
sing "Kumbaya," what happens is the first one
in the first round who does something cooperative is
some schmuck who's one step behind everybody
else for the rest of time.
There's no way to get these cooperative systems to evolve
initially.
We'll see there are ways.
And this is one of those-- have it driven initially
by kin selection, and then throw it into the general population.
So that's one version of where group selection has crept back
in.
Another version is sort of the more generalized form of it.
And it could be illustrated-- OK, the following example.
You've got chickens.
You've got chickens with an array of traits,
and you can see there's two types of chickens.
One chicken is super aggressive and beats on everybody else,
and she lays lots of eggs.
Another chicken-- far more pacific and introspective
and less aggressive and has fewer eggs.
So now you take any one of the high-aggression females
and one of the low-aggression guys and put them together,
and who's going to leave more copies of her genes?
The high-aggression female laying lots of eggs.
Now instead, you have a whole group
of the high-aggression females and a whole group
of the low-aggression females.
What's going to happen in the high-aggression females?
They're all so aggressive that they all injure each other.
They all stress each other into lower fertility rates,
all of that.
And suddenly you have this very important world
in which A can dominate B, but where groups of B
dominate groups of A. And it's in that realm
that you suddenly get a push towards group selection.
When selection on that level-- a world of any individual being
outcompeted because of a trait.
But as a "collective"-- and bringing in that word not
randomly, as a collective in the collectivist future
of low-ranking chickens to throw off their chains--
once you have a group of them, the same traits that could be
disadvantageous on an individual dyadic level,
as a group outcompetes the others.
And when you do that, you've suddenly got group selection
in a classical form, where these animals,
because of their traits, they are not behaving
for the good of the group.
But the very traits that are disadvantageous
individually are advantageous as a group.
And it's another way of thinking about this.
If you indiscriminately make low-interest loans
to everybody on earth, you are very readily
falling into this category.
If you were part of a group that makes
low-interest loans to each other,
suddenly you outcompete the other.
A fascinating book.
An evolutionary biologist named David Sloan Wilson, who's
been the main person pushing for this idea for decades,
has a very broad range of intellectual interests,
including religious history.
And a number of years ago, he published a book
called Darwin's Cathedral.
And he analyzed the birth of clusters of new religions
over time as examples of founder effects and group
selection-type properties.
And he wound up, in great detail,
analyzing Calvin and the starts of Calvinism and Calvin
and his sidekick Hobbes in Zurich in the 17th century,
or whenever it was that Calvinism started,
of analyzing how there were all sorts of these little religions
popping up there in these little city-states.
And what it was about Calvinism-- in I
think it was Zurich-- that took off,
where they established some of these inbred cooperative
patterns and then beat the pants off
of all the other city-states.
And soon, all of central Europe was Calvinist.
Really interesting book in that regard.
OK.
So back has come this whole possibility of group selection.
And out of that has come the more broad way of thinking
about it now, which is multi-level selection,
a very important concept here, which is sometimes selection
occurs entirely on the level of a single gene.
In other words, have a gene with bad enough of a mutation,
and it doesn't matter how many great other genes you got
going for you.
Selection will be decided entirely
on the basis of one gene.
As we saw in our principles from the other day, much more
common-- selection at the level of the individual,
[? at ?] an aggregation of the genotype playing out
in terms of phenotype all the different traits there.
But what this introduces is some circumstances where selection
is at the group level.
And it is never at the level of how an individual's trait plays
out individually in a group.
It's how this trait played out individually
emerges as a group behavior that you get group selection.
And this marks this great peace that's
come between this David Sloan Wilson
and the guy who's probably the most towering figure
in this whole field, this guy EO Wilson,
Edward O. Wilson at Harvard.
David Sloan Wilson and EO Wilson spent years
not getting along with each other because Wilson-- Wilson--
because EO Wilson is very strongly
individual selectionist model guy,
and thus he hated group selection.
David Sloan Wilson, the other way around.
Each of them were endlessly invited
to the wrong parties because of the same shared last name
and all sorts of social awkwardness there.
In the last few years, I don't know what happened.
I don't know if they arranged marriages
between their grandchildren or something.
But they arranged some sort of truce.
And Wilson-Wilson published a paper last year
basically saying, whoa, you know what?
Some of the time I'm right, and some of the time he's right.
And isn't that great, and can't we all get along,
and delineating circumstances where individual selection--
individual selection, kin selection, reciprocal altruism
is going to dominate circumstances
where selection is going to get played out at the group level.
They love each other now.
They have formed a new language.
They share burial customs.
And this sort of constitutes a great resolution.
Yeah, depending on the circumstances,
the most important thing in evolution
might be a single gene, a single organism, or a single group.
And the power of a group and aggregate traits that
work lousy in the individual is going
to be really important down the line
when thinking about aggression and stopping aggression
and things of that sort.
OK.
So all of this is great.
This multi-level selection now showing
sort of a fancier, more sophisticated way
of thinking about individual, kin,
reciprocal circumstances, where it works,
circumstances where this is the most interesting thing.
So that's great.
So now we begin to look for a first pass of where
humans fit into this.
We've already seen in terms of all of these traits, tournament
versus pair bonding, we're somewhere in between.
In terms of imprinted genes, we're somewhere in between.
These are specifics.
How do we begin for a first pass to think
about humans, human behavior, fitting into these frameworks?
Two problems, or two issues, that are all we'll
touch on at this point.
The first one is, there is this temptation,
as soon as you think along these lines, to discover, oh,
isn't that interesting?
Langur monkeys will have infanticide.
Male langur monkeys will kill the kids of some other male.
Human males do that sometimes.
Oh, langur monkeys might be an interesting evolutionary model
for where infanticidal behavior came from in humans.
Oh, isn't this interesting?
Dominance is passed along by males.
We do that [? sometimes. ?] isn't it interesting?
Kidnapping somehow occurs.
And before you know it, you have a world in which people
are saying, well, damselflies do something that look like rape.
So huh, we've got a damselfly model of human behavior
in that realm.
And two things are happening there.
One is taking the traits, a small number of traits,
in some other species and inflating the relevance it has
for understanding us.
The other danger is that somewhere,
creeping below the surface, is you see
it happens in other species.
It's kind of natural.
It's kind of inevitable.
This is a whole world in which people have run off
with how this applies to humans in a completely distorted way.
We are unique as a species, as is every other species.
We are unique.
By applying the same evolutionary rules
that every other species has, that's the commonality, not
the outcome.
The other challenge is constantly
going to be that you get all these great predictive models,
and then humans go and screw it up
by having quirks and idiosyncrasies
and personalities and stuff like that.
All I can say in that realm is, back to Wednesday,
if making sense of which lions are going
to go to the scary speaker in the bushes there revolves,
in some part, around personalities, humans,
by the time you get to us, blindly assuming these models
apply is going to be very shaky.
OK.
So just a first pass at how one will
have to be cautious for the rest of course
in applying all these models.
Now, far more critically, is looking at,
what are the criticisms that have been brought
against this whole framework?
This framework of social behavior
has evolved to maximize the number of copies
of genes driven by kin, driven by reciprocal altruism.
Group selection is a rare trait, but when it does,
it follows these properties.
This is how you explain all the behavior.
Know these four or five rules and not only
can you look at two skulls of different sizes,
but you can explain all behavior and all of human behavior,
and it's all biology.
And eventually, as EO Wilson said
in his landmark book of his in 1975,
Social Biology, eventually all of the social sciences
will be under the wing of evolutionary biology.
No surprise that social scientists were not
very pleased with that proclamation at that point.
But this was this notion that this was
going to explain everything.
So what are the criticisms that have been leveled
at this style of thinking?
And as we'll see, there are a lot of them.
All of the stuff we've been thinking about,
this basic notion of applying the Darwinian rules as to why
giraffe have to have hearts of certain size to behavior,
there's three features that are coming through [INAUDIBLE].
The first one is the notion of heritability of traits.
Because what we've been discussing
throughout the last lecture or so is,
there's heritability of the tendency to kidnap infants
at the right strategic time.
There's heritability of the tendency
to decide that you like males with big, fancy plumage
and long canines.
There's heritability to deciding that your daughter should
be highest ranking in the troop [INAUDIBLE].
Heritability.
An assumption of heritable behavioral traits
runs through every single one of these discussions.
The next theme that runs throughout all of them
is the notion of adaptiveness.
If some trait has emerged out of the evolutionary murk,
if some trait has been selected for,
selection implies adaptiveness-- the notion
that everything you see has an adaptive explanation for why
it's emerged evolutionarily.
The third principle, which is not explicitly stated
in this field very often but is implicit to everything
about it, is these processes of evolutionary change
are gradual.
At every generation, if by getting into some better
behavioral strategy for playing prisoner's dilemma
you leave 1% more copies of your genes than everybody else,
come back in 100 zillion generations
and that trait will have spread.
All of this is played out in generation after generation
so that evolutionary change is occurring
in gradual, incremental steps.
So what do you do with these three starting points?
The first one.
An awful lot of the next two weeks
will be looking at how other disciplines look
at the issue of, how do you figure out
when a behavior is genetic?
And one of the first things we'll learn
is how that phrase means absolutely nothing whatsoever.
Maybe a better way of stating it is, how do you
figure out when a behavioral trait has a genetic influence?
And as we'll see, even the safer way of saying it
is, how do you figure out in which
environment a certain behavior has
a particular genetic influence?
How do other disciplines go about saying, oh, it's genetic.
It's genetic.
In this field, among this sort of sociobiological thinking,
what you do is an inverse style of proof.
You say, OK, if a trait has a genetic component,
you would expect it to be heritable along these lines.
If it's more adaptive, it will increase
its frequency, all of that.
And look, that explains where competitive infanticide has
come from.
Show me a more explanatory model.
Show me a model that is more predictive.
And until you can show me one, I'm
assuming this trait has some heritability.
And we'll see how, by next week, the more molecular people
rip this view to shreds.
Tell me, when you're talking about heritability
of some behavior, show me the damn gene.
Show me the sequence of DNA.
Show me how that produces the behavior.
This is where this field ends saying, oh, we
can inferentially sort of decide there's a genetic influence.
As we'll see by next week, this one piece
is the main thing attacked by a number of other fields.
Next piece, the adaptiveness-- the notion
that everything that has evolved has
evolved under the scalpel of evolutionary demand
for optimization and all of that.
And the critics of this view call
this the adaptationist fallacy-- the notion
that everything is there for a good reason.
And what they often do in terms of making fun of that is that,
oh, you look at people who do this kind
of evolutionary biology with this adaptationist emphasis,
and it's one big just-so story.
Why do giraffe have hearts with thick muscles?
And here's the story I make up, and if my story is better than
yours, I get tenure and you don't.
Why is that the zebras got stripes?
Why is it that males kill infants
in this species or whatever?
That everything is adaptive.
And what you need to do now is come up with the story
to explain why it's adaptive.
And if it fits some of those principles of individual
and group, et cetera, then you win.
You've got the best just-so story.
And what is constantly brought as a sort of criticism
of that is, show me experimental evidence that it is adaptive.
And by the time we get to looking
at the field of ethology, you'll see a whole way
in which people do that.
Show me that it's possible to disprove it.
OK, tell me a just-so story, where if that were the case,
that would prove that this is not what's going on.
You got to have the rules of science.
It can't just be you observe something and come up
with the best story and you win.
But what's most striking in sort of terms of criticizing this
is some domains in which there are
traits that have not evolved because they are adaptive.
They've just evolved because they are excess baggage.
And this has brought in a whole sort of criticism of the field.
Now, some of the time, when you begin to see-- it's
kind of hard to see where the adaptiveness is.
It's because it's a more subtle feature of it.
For example, you could look at squid.
And someone who is enamored with fish
and how cool and aerodynamic, aquadynamic, fish are
and all of that, will point out that squid
are pretty lousy swimmers compared to all sorts of fish.
They're pretty lousy swimmers compared to fish,
but they're pretty great swimmers for something
starting out evolutionarily as a mollusk.
This adaptiveness has to be in the context of where it
came from and where it got to.
OK, so that is a qualifier.
Nonetheless, even factoring that in,
of hidden features of adaptation in evolutionary history,
there's lots of traits that are simply not adaptive.
And one of the most effective critics
of this whole view, Stephen Jay Gould,
introduced a term about 30 years ago that summarized this view.
Gould was a paleontologist at Harvard,
and his thinking will come in a whole lot in next week's
lectures.
He teamed up with another guy, a molecular geneticist at Harvard
named Richard Lewontin.
And in critiquing a lot of this, they came up with a term
saying an awful lot of traits have evolved
that exist not because they're adaptive,
but because they're spandrels.
So at that point, everybody in the field
had to go run to their dictionary
because Gould and Lewontin were all being snotty and coming up
with fancy, highfalutin culture terms,
because it turns out "spandrel" is a term from architecture.
So immediately, they already won points off of everyone else
for being all cultured and stuff.
But a spandrel, a spandrel is you got some medieval building.
Remarkably enough, that's a medieval building, and-- [SIGH]
[LAUGHTER]
--it's a nice medieval building.
[LAUGHTER]
And what you get is you have these arches that-- there winds
up being a space between arches, that's
there's space between arches just because you
can't build arches next to each other
without there being like this space here.
This is solid brick or LEGO blocks or whatever.
So you have these arches, and there's a space in between.
And you got this space.
It's not there for any good reason.
It's there because you can't put two arches next to each other
without coming up with this triangular space.
And the architectural term for those triangles
are "spandrels."
And spandrels, in architecture, is something
that forms between two arches.
And as Gould and Lewontin used the term,
a spandrel is some trait that occurs simply
as the unavoidable outcome of some other traits that
are being selected for.
You can't put two arches together
without getting some sort of triangular shape in between.
And throughout the history of architects making spandrels,
these would be artistically built up and all of that,
and there would be all sorts of decorative stuff on that.
So if you were an adaptationist [? folly ?] person,
everything has an adaptive [? purpose. ?] You look at that
and, oh, there's got to be some reason why spandrels have
evolved and have these elaborate secondary sexual features
on spandrels, little gossamer things flying around and stuff.
And there's got to be an adapt-- oh, I know,
because people in church will look up at it a whole lot,
and their necks will get sore.
And when their necks stop being sore,
they will decide this is the glory of God,
and they will increase their [? belief. ?]
That's why architects put in spandrels.
No, you can't build buildings like this
without spandrels happening.
And just because they were there,
why not let's decorate them.
That's the evolution of spandrels.
And in Gould and Lewontin's critique,
an awful lot of stuff, where the sociobiology types
would sit there and say, we're going to have a just-so story
contest now and use our principles
and figure out some way in which this is actually adaptive,
they're saying, this actually wasn't selected
for because it's adaptive.
It was an inadvertent byproduct of something else.
So here's an example of that would be given.
Humans have chins.
Humans have chins.
Apparently, all humans do have chins
hidden away someplace or other.
Humans have chins.
And weirdly, we're like the only primate that does.
You look at, like, other apes and stuff,
and they have the sort of weak chins
that suggest sort of immoral characters and criminality
and things like that.
We're the only species that has chins.
And apparently, there's been some like nutty adaptationist
school somewhere back when, trying
to make sense of why it is that humans evolved chins.
Why it is that human faces come to a point there,
and what's the adaptive advantage?
And [? where ?] you can, like, stab rivals--
[LAUGHTER]
--or you can get crumbs from out of the corner on the floor
and stuff with your chin.
Until somebody figured out that there's
no way that you could have a primate face
that has a muzzle foreshortened and a jaw at this angle.
You do this, and you do this, and you're
going to get this little spandrel thing sticking out
there.
And oh, there hasn't been selection for a chin
because you have selection for a hominid face
with a shortened muzzle, and this thing pops out there.
And suddenly, all those doctoral theses
about the reproductive advantages of chins
go down the tubes there.
It was merely a spandrel.
And Gould and Lewontin's argument
is that there's lots and lots of spandrels,
that this emphasis-- everything is adaptive,
everything is the outcome of competition--
that's produced that, an awful lot of stuff
is excess baggage that merely gets carried along
because the evolutionary process isn't all that efficient.
You're starting with a mollusk if you
want to make yourself a squid.
Giving rise to another concept, another term in the field.
Andre Lwoff, who was a French-- or was it Jacob?
They were these two French molecular biology guys,
and they both got Nobel Prizes.
And one of them said this, and I don't remember which,
but I'm going to say it was Lwoff
because I like saying Lwoff.
Andre Lwoff once said that "Evolution is not an inventor.
Evolution is a tinkerer."
It works with preexisting structures.
And the notion that you're going to see this everywhere,
you're gluing stuff together.
You're duct taping this part of the pelvis
to this part of the circulatory system, whatever.
And you're going to have spandrels.
An awful lot of what those folks go
through in these whole song and dances of adaptation
are merely spandrels.
Evolution is not about optimizing every single trait.
What comes out of that is this notion
that an awful lot of this world of competition
really isn't about competition.
You stick with these models, the models
we've been covering for the last two days,
and every bit of advantage is going
to increase the number of copies of your genes.
What's the only possible outcome?
You need to compete.
You need to outcompete.
It was a critique of this whole view
as being one driven very strongly by competition,
because all the traits there are driven
by having to out-reproduce the next individual, next
individual.
Another realm in which this has been critiqued
has been by, interestingly, evolutionary biologists
from the Soviet Union.
And where it was emphasized there--
in Western sort of emphasis in evolutionary biology,
most of evolutionary selection was
about competing with other individuals.
Sexual competition, competing for running
away from the predator faster than the guy next to you,
competing for food, all of that.
If you're sitting there in the Soviet Union
and you're thinking about evolutionary biology, what
you're mostly thinking about is evolving
the means of surviving climate demands, surviving extremes
of climate, what would be categorized as abiotic
rather than biotic, abiotic demands in the environment.
And when you look at species where most of their survival
is about surviving ecological extremes,
environmental extremes, you don't
see a whole lot of competition.
That's a world with far less.
And throughout the years, the Soviet evolutionary biologists
tended to emphasize abiotic selection, which
had far less of an emphasis on competition.
The final piece, though, the gradualism.
The gradualism is very intrinsic to this.
Because if everything is adaptive,
every little bit of advantage is worth
fighting for, and competition and killing
each other's infants and killing each other's sperms
and oviducts and all of that.
And every little bit is going to make
for a little bit of an advantage,
and you will have this gradualist change.
And the huge challenge that came to that
was from Gould and another scientist in the '80s, a notion
that maybe that's not what evolution looks like.
Maybe evolution is not occurring in these gradualist,
incremental steps.
Maybe what occurs instead is long periods of nothing
happening and then a rapid evolutionary change.
In long periods, nothing happening,
then rapid evolutionary change, something
that they called punctuated equilibrium.
And the whole next lecture is going to be about this.
Critical implications-- the genetics
of how stuff evolves turns out to fit
far better the molecular genetics with these models
of punctuated, rapid change, and stasis,
equilibrium, punctuated change, rather than these gradualist
models.
And if that's what it looks like in these steps, most
of the time you're not punching it
out for every one-half of 1% reproductive advantage,
and it's all competition.
Most of the time, nothing's happening at all,
and there's periods of severe selection and then long periods
in which nothing happens.
A step function like that, the role of competition
is reduced tremendously in thinking about evolution.
So we're going to spend a ton of time
looking at the punctuated equilibrium model.
To give away the punch line that I
know you are all on the edge of your seats for,
I kind of think it's right in a lot of the circumstances
of evolution because it fits much better
with the molecular biology.
Finally, in addition to these critiques of show me the genes,
everything doesn't have to be adaptive
because there are spandrels, and besides, this is really
wimpy science where science counts as making of the best
story, and there's no reason to think that it's gradual,
there's a mechanism for this as well.
In addition to that, there's always
been a final realm of criticism of this style of thinking,
which has been a political critique.
And in lots of realms of science,
you can't really imagine a political critique
as to whether cilia on amoeba flip this way or that way
or a critique as to whether, like, plants
should have three clover things or four clover things,
that there's not a political factor in that.
There's a huge amount of sociopolitical implications
that run through this entire field.
Because it addresses issues of like how natural,
how evolutionarily ancient, how evolutionarily honed, how
adaptive are things like whether a species, a society,
has male domination or not, has strict hierarchies or not,
has certain degrees of aggression,
has certain patterns of sexual coercion.
And a whole world arguing that these things have
a naturalistic grounding in adaptation versus a whole world
that says that's jibberish.
Most of the time, nothing's happening.
And when it does, a lot of it is spandrels.
Those have very different political implications.
And from day one, the critics of this entire world
have made a point of something that initially
seems kind of silly, but may not be silly,
which is the entire founding generation
of these sociobiologists were white, Southern males.
Make of that what you will.
EO Wilson from Alabama, Robert Trivers, Irven DeVore,
a whole population of these folks,
the first generation of these people,
were all white males from the American South.
Whereas Gould and Lewontin, all of these guys,
were Northeastern Marxists.
OK.
So we got kind of a major contrast here.
And the critique of the sociobiological view is, well,
isn't it interesting that their notion of how evolution works
just happens to emphasize the naturalness of a system that
rewards them for the inequalities that we have?
Isn't it interesting that their models predict the naturalness
of a world in which they're the ones who benefit most
from the notion that this is natural?
And from day one, that has been a strong critique.
And that's not like critiquing cilia amoeba theories
for political implications.
That is a very real one.
Because the notions that this is pertinent to making sense of,
is rape a human psychopathology, or is
rape a competitive strategy, is the fact
that children are more likely to be killed by stepfathers
than by biological fathers.
Does that represent something about the typical socioeconomic
pressures in families with step-parents
versus the natural biology of gene competition
through competitive infanticide?
This has a lot of implications.
And from day one, as this field emerged in the late '70s,
there was a huge political agenda
that was assumed to be there.
Sufficiently so at one lecture, a famous conference in 1977
where EO Wilson was presenting there, a bunch of people
rushed the stage and knocked him off the stage
and dumped water on him and chanted,
whatever it is in German, saying, we will have
a society of law and order.
This is pretty agitated circumstances
for thinking about science.
This was a group in Boston called Science
for the People, which was a Marxist group at the time
there, and saying, all this sociobiological stuff
is doing is justifying a world in which it is male-dominated,
stratified, and where aggression and competition pays off.
And this has been highly controversial
from the beginning.
The one counter to it-- and I think a lot of that was valid,
and I think a lot of it instead defaults
into models where this is not making a whole lot of sense.
The one thing to be pointed out is,
when we see what punctuated equilibrium is about,
it's exactly the sort of world of evolution
that produces the sort of world that a Gould or a Lewontin
would want it to be, one which minimizes competition
in favor of cooperation and a whole pattern of stasis
and rapid dialectical change.
It's exactly the world that two Marxist geneticists would
say evolution should be about.
So I think that as a first pass, you're
seeing this stuff is dripping in sociopolitical implications.
So starting Monday, we will look at this punctuated equilibrium,
taking apart this piece of the story.
And basically, for the rest of the course, examining.
 So we pick up from whatever the last day was.
And we do our first disciplinary leap
as promised at the very beginning of the course.
The entire function of the first half of the course
is to leap from one bucket to another, such that
just as soon as you feel like you are getting mildly
comfortable in one, we will spend time
trashing it from the standpoint of a different discipline.
This is our first one of these.
And the whole point of this jump is to show on a certain level
exactly where one discipline's the notion of an explanation
ends, another one begins.
And what this one will be about is how evolution works down
on a molecular level.
Where did we leave off after finishing our overview
of the evolution of behavior?
We finished with a bunch of criticisms at the end.
Criticizing sort of what some of the basic tenets
were of that view.
First off, that notion of heritability.
Heritability-- assuming that all sorts of behaviors
have a genetic component, have a genetic basis,
have a genetic cause.
And we will see those are worlds of differences in those words
there.
And what we saw was that that could be the case.
That could not be the case.
That's going to be what we focus on a great deal today.
Another one of the basic tenets--
this notion of adaptation.
Everything you see is wonderfully adaptive.
The outcome is exactly the process
that evolution brings about to optimize results.
The counter view being the world of spandrels-- a lot
of the time, stuff gets carried along as baggage.
Things evolving aren't necessarily things
that have been sculpted into being as adaptive as possible.
Another critique, and one that's also central today,
is that whole emphasis on the gradualism,
on small incremental changes.
And what I alluded to at the end the other day
is going to see a viewpoint where
something very, very different is proposed to be going on.
One that will make sense only eventually when
we see some pretty unexpected things about genetics
and the molecular biology of.
OK, so starting off-- what we also finished with
was a notion that there are political agendas that
run through every aspect of this subject.
And if that very first lecture, back
when talking about how some of these viewpoints influence who
gets a lobotomy, who winds up exterminated,
who winds up being viewed as educatable or uneducatable,
et cetera, polypolitical views run throughout all of this
you will see very strongly in this realm.
OK.
So that viewpoint of the sociobiologists,
the evolutionary psychologists the other day,
one of the tenets going after the notion of heritability.
The notion that these behaviors are heritable,
or are genetically influenced, blah, blah.
How would folks in that business do it?
What they would do is exactly what we were saying.
Which is say, OK, here's some behavioral structure.
And we know how evolution works, and evolution of behavior,
and individual selection, and kin selection,
and reciprocal altruism, and evolution
of, and all the above.
And then they say, Well, with that framework, that explains
the behavior pretty well.
Go show me something better.
Show me a better theoretical structure
that's even more explanatory, more predictive.
And until you come up with something better,
I'm going to assume that this one is right.
And this one comes with a larger assumption
of heritability of genetics all built around inferentially.
These are highly structured models
built around how genes work.
They explain what we see with these behaviors.
And until you can give me a model that does even a better
job, I'm sticking with this, and this
counts as my evidence for a genetic component
to this set of behaviors.
And what we'll see is that's exactly where
the molecular biologists decide that they finally
have gotten free of people doing poetry
for all the science in it.
My god, that counts as science?
Coming up with a bunch of these rules
there and saying until you come up with fancier rules or a more
pleasing just so story, I win?
That counts as science?
Complete contempt for this approach.
This is where more molecular stance about it all takes off.
And what we'll see that that not only will
have lots to say about adaptiveness,
it will also have lots to say about gradualism.
So starting with it.
In order to make sense of this, for a molecular biologist
what is evolution about?
When you see traits that have evolved, what's it about?
By necessity, what one is immediately talking about
is genes.
Genes in this case not as some constructs
that one wants to maximize copies of and ones
that your cousins have only whatever percentage
of in common with you, but genes instead molecules.
Genes as information, genes as strings of DNA.
And I'll assume by now there's like a basic level of shared
knowledge about this after hearing that a lot of folks
came to the catchup session last week, which I think
is a good idea.
But what it's all built about, all of this notion of genes,
eventually way out the other end having something
to do with behavior, is the intermediary of proteins.
Proteins are important.
Proteins are important not just to have
in your diet to make you run fast, and strong, and all.
Proteins are, in lots of ways, the structurally most important
things you've got making up cells.
Proteins have endless roles.
Proteins hold the shapes of cells together.
Proteins form messengers, hormones,
neurotransmitters, all of this to come.
Proteins are the enzymes that do all sorts
of the most important stuff.
Proteins, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
Proteins are the workhorses of what
have cells doing what they're supposed to do.
So the question of course becomes
what codes for proteins?
And this is where genes come in.
Our basic issue here is this flow of information-- genes
specify proteins.
Proteins are made up of constituent building blocks,
amino acids.
There's approximately 20 different ones
that are commonly occurring.
And each one has to be coded for with a different DNA
sequence, a different DNA sequence of three
letters, three nucleotides.
And I hope I'm not hitting the level here where people
for whom this is new this is going way too fast
and everybody else this is way too boring.
But hang on for a while in that case.
So DNA codes for amino acids.
A long string of DNA coding for a sequence of them
will code for a sequence of amino acids
which get plugged together, and you then have a protein.
You've got one intervening step, which for our purposes
is like not really interesting.
And we could ignore it for the most part.
Which is, there's an intermediary step--
genes at the level of DNA, sequences of DNA,
first specify an intermediate form called RNA.
And it's from that that you get the readout forming
the proteins.
Now, everything about the function of this
is built out of the following sequence.
If you know the sequence of DNA, you
will know the sequence of RNA.
You will know the amino acid sequence.
You will know the protein that thus is made.
You will know the shape of the protein.
And you will then know the function of the protein.
And that is this critical link between what DNA, genes,
evolution, blah, blah, are about,
and the actual things that pop out at the other end
and do something.
For the very critical reason that everything
about protein function is built round shape.
Here is a cliche that is required by law
to be said at this point.
Which is, all sorts of effector proteins
fit into other molecules, other effector proteins.
Like a-- OK, everybody say it out loud.
Everybody knows this cliche.
It fits in like a--
Glove.
Yes.
OK.
Cliched education at its best.
Like a lock and key for those of you
who are not tortured with this one from early on.
It's the whole notion that a shape of a protein imparts
information insofar as it interacts
with something else of a shape which modifies it,
which complements it, whatever.
The whole world that we will have of various hormones
and neurotransmitters will consist
of hormones and neurotransmitters going
into receptors where there is a critical relationship
in the shape between the messenger and the receptor.
And all of this is driven by proteins,
protein shape, et cetera.
All of this is driven thus by DNA sequences.
Shape is everything with this.
What you get from that is, of course,
the question of where do you get different shapes from?
And those 20 amino acids, for our purposes,
for the purposes especially people
without a strong chemistry background,
all that's pertinent here is the 20 different amino acids
have different degrees of being attracted to
or repelled by water.
Which, most proteins are spending their life swimming
around in water.
They are pulled towards water.
They avoid it.
They are hydrophilic, hydrophobic.
All that means is different amino acids gets
pulled into different positions by their relationship
with water.
And thus, a string of amino acids,
the shape it winds up getting with,
is determined by that amino acid sequence.
There is a whole world of really interesting
horrible neurological diseases called
prion diseases which show that everything I just said
is wrong.
But for our purposes, everything I just said is right.
So this is where you get this critical relationship.
Know the DNA sequence.
Know the coding.
And out the other end, you will get protein shape because
of this business of different amino acids
having different relationships with water
and thus strings of them coming up
with different three dimensional structures.
And out of that will be coming function out
of the famed lock and key nature between shapes of functions
and shapes of other things.
Just once again for people fairly new at this-- nope.
No diagram there.
One of the most interesting-- or the blank slate.
One of the most interesting things the proteins do
is when they are enzymes.
Everybody knows that enzymes are important because they put them
in your laundry detergent, and advertise
about how cool it is that you have enzymes in your detergent.
But what enzymes do is they catalyze reactions.
They cause reactions to occur which left on their own
would be very, very rare events.
What enzymes do is accelerate vastly--
a gazillion times over-- the speed with which these happen.
Catalyze reactions.
What do I mean by that?
For our purposes, they can take two things
that aren't connected and stick them together.
Or they can take one thing and break it apart.
For our purposes, that's what enzymes do.
Virtually every enzyme out there is a protein.
So proteins fit into other things and send on messages.
Proteins are enzymes.
Pull things together, pull them apart.
Proteins are structural.
Again, a whole lot of the superstructure of your cells
are held together by proteins.
This is the realm of what they do.
Notice here, suddenly there is a change of shape in a protein
if it's an enzyme.
Because what's it doing?
In some way, it's got to be pulling apart something
or putting something together.
The shape, in some cases, also can
change as a function of what this protein is
doing with its job.
We will see a classic version of that are channels.
Channels in which chemicals can flow in or out of cells.
Ions, for chemistry types.
Channels that will open up under some circumstances,
close under others.
So protein structure not only gives shape and function,
but it gives the circumstances where the shape might change
in a functionally relevant way.
So out of all of this comes of the central dogma of life.
And this was proposed by Francis Crick of Watson and Crick fame.
And Francis Crick was the one who
formalized saying the central dogma of how
life and information flows is DNA to RNA to protein.
And that became defining.
An entire generation of babies were told that at birth.
This is the flow of information.
It has been violated in all sorts
of interesting ways, which will dominate a lot of what comes.
But this was the central dogma.
One way in which it is violated--
and again, this notion is not DNA to RNA,
but the notion of whatever your DNA sequence is, whatever
the gene is, whatever structure of a protein
it codes for-- the flow of information
is going to be from DNA, RNA, to protein.
DNA as running everything.
Note the importance of that in the very statement of this
as the central dogma, the canonical flow of information
in life.
It all starts with DNA.
DNA is the one sitting here deciding when information is
going to flow from DNA to RNA.
DNA as knowing what's happening.
And a lot of what we will see shortly is DNA knows squat.
DNA is not making a whole lot of decisions there.
The one simplistic way in which central dogma went down
the tubes in the 1970s or so, and one
that's tangential here, but just as a first blow
against central dogma.
One of the things that's interesting
is there are things called viruses.
And what viruses do for a living is get into organisms.
Viruses, in the classical form, being little smidgens
of foreign DNA which are able to get into the DNA of your own,
hijack the processes there, and make the cell
function for its own parasitic, vicious needs.
And so you are changing the starting step of how
the central dogma of life.
And thus you're going to change RNA and protein, all of that.
In the '70s, it became apparent there
was one weirdo viral world of viruses made out
of RNA, this intermediate form.
All sorts of people were extremely upset about this
and tried to ostracize the scientists who
came up with this and told them there's no way.
But eventually, what was shown in Nobel Prize
winning glory was there's a class of enzymes.
Enzymes-- they pop up.
A class of enzymes that could take the RNA information
and turn it back into DNA, viral information.
And then it does its thing.
Huge blow to the central.
Here's information running from an RNA virus somehow being
reversed back to a DNA form.
And thus these are called retro viruses.
Inserting the DNA, and off they go from there.
So this was a major blow.
Everybody eventually came to terms with this.
But it still is a minor footnote in this Crickian world
of everything flows from DNA.
It is the Bible.
It is the law giver.
It is the holy grail.
It is where it all starts.
So stay tuned.
So given that framework, one should immediately
get mighty impressed with what if something changes
in the DNA?
What if one of the bits of coding is coded incorrectly?
What if we now have on our hands a mutation?
And what we'll focus on here is classical realms
of mutation, and genetics, and how
that plays out in classical, gradualist models
of evolutionary change, and then see how all of that
falls apart when you look at what's really going on.
So starting off, what you can have--
and again, this is going to be a review for people
with a background in this.
Newcomers to this-- hopefully this won't be going too fast.
But broadly when you were talking
about this world of micromutations,
for our purposes what we will mean by a micromutation
is when one letter in your DNA sequence of information
gets accidentally miscopied.
Or it gets changed by radiation.
Or it gets changed by some chemical compound
the environment.
Some such thing where there's a mistake and one
letter in the DNA sequence comes up wrong.
As I noted before, pairs of triplets.
And there we've got three pairs of triplets.
And what we've got here is at the DNA level,
a amino acid is coded for by three base pairs.
A triplet-- three of these.
Next amino acid coded for.
Next one coded for.
So what we've just raised is the possibility of a mutation
occurring, something changing in one single one,
and now asking what are the consequences
going to be in classical realms of genetics
and evolutionary change?
Broadly, you can get three different versions
of stuff going wrong.
One is where one of these letters--
nucleotides, translating; not essential to have that down--
where one of these letters is accidentally
changed into another letter-- a point mutation.
In some cases, point mutations are of no consequence at all.
How can that be?
For this very simple reason, going through some math here,
there are four different potential letters
at each one of these sites.
DNA comes in four different letter types, letter flavors,
four different types of bases.
And thus, you can have four different ones
in the first position times four,
times fourr-- a total of 64 possible three-step
combinations of DNA letters.
A possibility of 64 of them, and you're
only coding for 20 amino acids.
So you use up some of the 64 for signals
saying stop or start, or thank god it's Friday,
or who knows what.
But what you have, though, is a large redundancy.
You have a number of different triplet sequences
coding for the same amino acid.
There's redundancy in the genetic code.
And in general, where you get that redundancy,
where you get the differences in three triplets, a couple
of different triplets that code for the same amino acid,
they'll tend to differ in the middle one of the three
letters.
That's the easiest one to have a change where it doesn't change
the overall consequence of it.
So you will tend to have redundancy.
Each amino acid is coded for by a number
of closely-related triplets.
So first possible type of mutation-- this point mutation
where one letter is flipped to another.
Potentially, this could be of no consequence whatsoever.
If you flipped to a letter out of the middle one,
which happens to leave you with a triplet that codes
for the same amino acid.
In that case, you have a neutral mutation
of zero consequence whatsoever.
So that's not a very exciting mutation.
In
Some cases, you can have a single point
being changed where you wind up with a different amino acid
coded for.
And that's most typically, if it's a mutation in here or here
rather than the boring middle one,
you get a different amino acid.
Is that the end of the world?
Often not at all or only minimally
because a lot of the amino acids have similar feelings
and ambivalences about water, similar responses
and similar shapes.
It won't be exactly the same shape,
but the protein will function somewhat the same.
So you could have, in this case, a point mutation
and most people would not find the second line
to be impossible to make sense of in the context
of the first one.
Or you could have a point mutation which,
by changing one letter, produces a different amino acid,
and this one is majorly different.
This one has a completely different set
of attractions or being repelled by water.
Produces a protein of a very different shape and potentially
a very different message.
And shown here, just changing one letter in this case, one
single point mutation, and you dramatically
change the meaning of that.
And I actually did that once in the grant proposal.
Sort of the final paragraph-- we have now accomplished
x, y, and z with your money over the last five years.
And no wonder it didn't get renewed.
So in that case, you see a single point mutation
of great consequence.
So you can have one of these letters,
one of these nucleotide mistaken for another-- entirely
neutral, moderate consequence, or
major, disastrous consequence.
Second way of classical mutations,
the second version that it could come with
is there is a deletion.
One of the letters gets lost in the process.
And what you then get is a frame shift over to the missing spot
there.
And the D from here now finishes up this.
And what you can see is it suddenly
becomes dramatic jibberish.
And it would continue that way.
A deletion mutation, in classical genetics,
is major league.
It totally changes the coding downstream from that.
Third classical type-- an insertion mutation.
One where you now accidentally double the letter,
and you're frame shifted in the opposite direction.
Just as screwing up of meaning.
Major consequences there.
So you have point mutations, which
can have major consequences, or can have none whatsoever,
and anything in between.
You have point mutations, and then you
have insertion and deletion.
The last two tend to have big consequences.
So all of this is built around one single base pair change.
And all of this is built around thus one single protein
changing its shape.
And thus, this world of micromutation-- single spots
that are mutating-- what this tends to do,
and this is an important concept for what's to come,
what it does is it changes how well the protein does its job.
It changes the efficacy of that protein
by changing the shape a little bit,
by changing it dramatically, all of that.
And we can see back to our lock and key
where if, thanks to a mutation, this
has a slightly different shade, it will fit into the lock
slightly less effectively.
It may stay in there for a shorter time
before floating off and thus send less of a message.
On the other hand, if you've got a deletion insertion that
dramatically changes the shape of this,
you will change how well this protein does its job.
It won't do its job at all, because it's
going to wind up with a completely different shape
and not fit in there whatsoever.
What we have here is a world of mutations
which are changing the function of one protein at a time.
That is microevolutionary change,
and that's what we're now going to see played out.
When can this make a difference?
This can make huge differences when
it's in the realm where, thanks to a change in the shape,
the protein is completely out of business.
Two examples-- one where you take out the function
of the preexisting gene.
First one-- there is this amino acid.
For our purposes, that's going to derail us.
For our purposes, there's a chemical
that occurs in the body called phenylalanine,
which has its uses.
But you don't want the levels of it
to build up too high, because it can become toxic, damaging
to brain cells, to neurons.
And fortunately, there is an enzyme
made of protein which turns phenylalanine into something
safer.
That's all we need to know about it.
So you have a mutation in the gene coding for that enzyme.
Not a fancy mutation to something.
One of these categories-- a classical, single spot
point mutation.
And what you got there is an enzyme that
no longer does its job.
And as a result, this phenylalanine
is not converted into the safer form,
builds up, and lays waste to one's nervous system.
And thus you have a disease-- PKU, phenylketonuria.
Very, very common genetic disorder.
And this is one where the outcome is a small mutation
that has completely knocked this enzyme out of business--
this enzyme which was able to turn
the phenylalanine into something safer.
This is not a subtle outcome.
Have untreated PKU, and your reproductive success
by the rules of evolution is going
to be real down near zero.
This destroys the nervous system very rapidly after birth.
So that's dramatic.
Here's another dramatic one.
And this one-- anyone who took BIO CORE,
I always bring this one in as a big hormone crowd pleaser.
But here's an interesting thing that
can go wrong with any child you might eventually have.
You've got a daughter, and she's doing just fine.
And she's growing up just fine, and things are terrific.
And around age 10, or 11, or so, some of her classmates
are beginning to reach puberty.
That's on the early side for the Western average,
but it's not outrageously early.
Not a big deal.
By about 12, statistically about half of the girls in her class
have reached puberty.
12 is about the Westernized average these days.
She hasn't yet.
Not a big deal.
A year later, she still hasn't.
Well, this is nothing critical, but it's getting a little bit
on the late side.
A year after that, two years after that, she
has still not reached puberty.
So at that point, you take her to a physician
who examines her closely and figures out what's up.
And at some point, the physician is probably
going to have pupils dilate, or some sort
of weird autonomic response, when they figure out what's up.
And then very calmly, in a premeditated way,
sit you down for a little talk afterward,
and inform you that your daughter has not
started menstruating, has not reached puberty yet.
Your daughter has not started to do this because you
don't have a daughter.
You've got a son.
This kid here for these last 14 years
has actually been male, not female.
You have what is called-- no, I'm not going to tell you it.
OK, it's called-- especially since it's in the handout
already-- anyone want to guess what it's called?
It's called TFM, Testicular Feminization Syndrome.
And you wind up with a testicular feminized male.
These are individuals who, genetically, are male.
At the level of chromosomes, that XX and XY business,
these are individuals who have testes.
Testes way up in their stomach or whatever, never
descended down.
These are people whose testes make testosterone.
Testosterone out the wazoo.
Tons of testosterone.
Enough testosterone to put like antlers on your testes,
or something.
That much testosterone.
And nonetheless, you're getting a female phenotype.
You are getting a female external genitalia.
You are getting female everything.
Yup, question?
Sorry, is that different than androgyne insensitivity?
No, that's the fancy term for it.
And you've just given away the punchline, you creep.
[LAUGHTER]
So they figured out in this disease there's
an insensitivity to something.
What could that be?
OK, go and say it again.
Yes, OK.
What you've got here is one of those simple little classical
mutations.
And what it does is it changed the shape of the androgen
receptor, the testosterone receptor.
And at that point it doesn't matter how much testosterone
is floating around, those target cells are not going to listen.
This is consequential.
This is a major consequence.
This is one of changing gender phenotype,
and there is a long and at times absolutely appalling
history of what has been done with individuals
who have Testicular Feminization Syndrome, what
counts as the medically appropriate intervention.
There's some horrifying history there
that could be straight out of the first lecture in terms
of some notions of what counts as normal gender behavior.
Another version of this-- this one's
a little bit more subtle because in this case,
it's not wiping out the function of an enzyme.
It's just making it a little bit less effective at what it does.
And this has to do with a disease that
is found in two different populations, slight variants
on it.
One is up in the Dominican Republic, in the mountains.
The other is in the mountains of New Guinea.
Interesting similarity there.
In both cases, some fairly isolated, inbred populations.
So that has genetics written all over it.
But in these cases, there is a problem with enzymes
that make testosterone.
So this is a whole other world.
Instead of the enzyme, instead of the proteins, and thus
the gene somewhere back there, that code
for the receptor for testosterone,
the receptor that responds to this messenger,
here instead it's back way up there in the testes.
A bunch of these enzymes, which go through a bunch of steps
and make testosterone, biosynthetic enzymes there.
Proteins, genes, once again.
So you've got a mutation in one of those critical, biosynthetic
enzymes.
And It's not a huge one.
The shape is a little bit off.
Its efficacy, the effectiveness with which
it makes testosterone is down a bit--
and actually it's down a lot-- so here's
what you wind up getting.
You get an individual who before puberty has
extremely low testosterone levels, even
far lower than you would see in prepubescent males in most
cases.
Someone who's genetically male.
Someone who never saw a whole lot of testosterone
during fetal life, way below the threshold
for the testosterone having any effects.
So the person is born phenotypically female.
Female in appearance.
Female in external genitalia.
And not internal-- back to those testicular feminized males.
What you find there is a vagina which goes nowhere,
because there's no ovaries waiting somewhere above that.
There is the testes.
But the external genitalia is just fine.
What I think these days is the most common medical ethics
advice and what's done with that is the physician explains what
it is and says, For all practical purposes,
you have a daughter who is perfectly healthy,
who's going to have a long, happy, healthy life,
and simply cannot reproduce.
That's the only consequence that's relevant here.
And there's been a whole other world
of reconstructive surgery, and all sorts of very interesting,
horrifying history.
So back to this one.
Because of the extremely low testosterone levels,
because at the time of life when there's not
a whole lot of testosterone around in the fetus,
in a young male, and now it's below the threshold
for causing anything.
Along comes puberty, and thanks to a whole bunch of changes
in the brain, signals go out so that testosterone levels now
come roaring up into the usual, impossible levels in the males.
And what happens here is the levels
don't go up as much as they should,
because that enzyme is a little bit on the slow side.
But they go up enough to pass threshold
for beginning to have an effect.
And somewhere right around puberty,
this individual changes sex.
This individual transfers, transmits,
jumps ship and goes from female to male
as a result of these androgenic effects suddenly coming in.
It's not a complete switch there,
but it's somewhat of a transition.
This is bizarre.
Again, this is not something subtle.
This is something changing completely here.
And again, one single mutation.
And in this case, not even a mutation wiping out
the function entirely of some protein
as in PKU or Testicular Feminization Syndrome.
But now you've got a protein that's
just working differently, slowly enough that you
get this very different picture popping out the other end.
What's most interesting is you have this intersection between
molecular biology and the bio-, endo-
consequences of this mutation, all of that.
And the cultural context of it, apparently
in both of these populations, people
have kind of adapted to it.
It's not a big deal.
You know, puberty-- sometimes you get acne.
Sometimes you get a penis.
And people just deal with that.
That's just part of the whole process
and cultural accommodation to interesting biology.
One final example of where you can
have a classical type of mutation,
and another version of a very mild difference.
And in this case, it is not a very mild difference
producing an overt disease.
In this case, it's just producing something
that probably differs in you from the person sitting next
to you.
Which is, you have a neurochemical system,
a system of chemical messengers in your brain.
If this is new stuff, hang on.
It will all be explained in a couple of weeks.
But this is a class of neurochemical signaling
that has something to do with anxiety.
A chemical messenger which decreases anxiety.
And we will learn plenty about that down the line.
And there's this regular class.
They're known collectively as benzodiazepines.
Do not panic if you've not heard that word before,
and certainly do not attempt to spell it right,
because it's not possible to.
So benzodiazepines.
There are synthetic versions of benzodiazepines
which people might take when they're
feeling anxious like Vallium, like Librium.
Vallium is the synthetic benzodiazepine.
So benzodiazepines are protein, and they
have a particular shape.
And you guessed, it there are thus benzodiazepine receptors,
which could do that whole lock and key deal going on there.
And what you have are differences,
small, single point, in this case not
mutations, but simply different versions
that one letter can come in in the DNA sequence specifying
the benzodiazepine receptor.
These are not mutations.
This is just normal variability is one particular spot
can specify two or three different amino acids
that function roughly the same.
So that you're changing somewhat the shape of the receptor,
and thus changing somewhat how long the benzodiazepine stays
in there, and how long the signal is sent.
And it's all very subtle.
And what does this begin to explain?
Individual differences in levels of anxiety.
It's only one of the gazillion ways of explaining it,
but it's part of that picture there.
Here we have individual differences.
This explained a very interesting finding.
For decades, people often tried to breed rats, different rat
lines for different behavioral traits.
And it makes it very useful models.
There are alcoholism prone rats.
There are rats that have been bred for being smart,
for being not as smart at spatial maze stuff, et cetera.
And for years, there'd been a number of rat lines
that have been bred that were either high anxiety
or low anxiety rats.
Very useful for understanding things like-- what are they're
useful for?
I don't know.
They're just cool to have around.
Very useful for understand the effects of stress,
or things of that sort.
So finally, modern era of molecular biology comes in,
and those high and low anxiety strains
differ in the shape of the benzodiazepine receptor in many
of these cases.
Again, tiny little differences.
So what we've got here is classic old genetics
at the molecular level.
These tiny little changes in one single base pair at a time--
point, deletion, insertion.
A world in which it may or may not change the shape.
Where it could change it dramatically and produce
some pretty exciting, dramatic diseases
where you wind up with a different gender
than your chromosomes say.
Ones where you get more subtle differences.
You change gender at your 13th birthday.
Or ones where we're just for the first time
beginning to look at the individual differences that
flow out from stuff like this.
Not them and their disease, but the individual variability.
All of this is in the realm of single base
pairs being changed.
What all of this now allows us to do
is translate this world of mutational changes
into what does this look like evolutionarily?
What does this look like in terms of explaining
patterns of evolution?
And you will know exactly where this goes right now.
This helps explain the classical,
the gradualist picture of little bits of change at a time.
Little bits because you've got one protein which now works
a little bit differently, and thus you
get to ask a sociobiology question.
By having testosterone having a little bit more of an effect
or a little bit less of an effect
by way of molecular changes in this receptor,
is that going to increase the number of copies of genes
that individual has?
Is it going to decrease the number?
How's it going to fit into all of last week's science?
And you will know exactly how that drill will run.
Oh, if thanks to one single base pair changing,
you now have a receptor which functions in a slightly
different way, which makes this individual 1.5% more
fertile than everybody else that they're competing against,
you just wait long enough and come back,
and everybody in that population is
going to have that different version of it.
We can run the logic there.
We have variability-- Darwinian variability-- thanks
to a mutation.
We have differential fitness.
We have just defined an adaptive difference somehow or other.
There there's a smidgen of advantage,
thanks to a slightly different shape.
And thus we have selection changing distribution
over time.
The smidgen more effective version
will become more common in the population.
And what's also intrinsic in that
is that these are slow little steps of change.
This is gradualism.
So gradualism is absolutely commensurate with everything
we got last week built around adaptation, competition.
Every little bit makes a difference
because 1% difference in number of copies your genes.
Run it enough generations, and that's
going to be a big difference, and all of it
changing in a very gradualist, incremental way.
This has popped up in a number of domains
and could be really useful, because it allows you
for one thing to trace evolutionary history by looking
at the changes of single base pairs.
And that's allowed for looking at one really interesting gene,
which we may talk about down the line, a gene called Fox P2.
Fox P2 has something to do with language.
Fox P2 was first identified and a family, all of whom
had some sort of language communication problem.
And people to this day argue whether it was mostly
about coordinating the motoric aspects of speech
or was it something about grasping the symbolic message
aspects of language, all of that.
In any case, a mutation was found in this gene,
and a whole cottage industry has emerged
since then of studying Fox P2.
Because versions of Fox P2 occur all
throughout the animal kingdom-- in birds, and rats,
and non-human primates, and all sorts of things.
Fox P2 popping up all over the place.
And in all these different places,
it's got something to do with communication.
It's got something to do with bird song.
It's got something to do with rat ultrasonic vocalizations.
Rats are constantly jabbering at each other in a range
that we can't hear.
And Fox P2 has something to do within all of those.
And different versions of Fox P2 in all these different species.
And what becomes most pertinent is
when you look at those differences,
you will see tiny little differences
in this tree across all these different species.
One base pair difference between rats and mice.
One base pair difference between hawks and elephants.
That sort of thing varies.
And then you look out at humans, and a whole bunch of changes.
A whole bunch of changes in a very short evolutionary period.
What this suggests is no wonder this
is producing some very different stuff than these guys.
A very different gene.
And a very different gene, people
now have been able to back calculate
due to a series of single base pair changes somewhere
in the last quarter million years or so.
And that makes a difference.
Totally cool, unsettling experiment
that was done a few years ago, which
was some people taking the human version of Fox P2
and knocking out a mouse line, knocking out their own Fox P2
and sticky in the human version and seeing what happens.
And it was very interesting.
They immediately sing the theme song from all the Mickey Mouse
cartoons.
Ha, can they prove that?
OK, what you see is you've got more complex types
of ultrasonic vocalization in these mice.
That's really interesting.
And there's years of stuff to sort out
what's going on with that.
For our purposes, the main thing is here
you have wound up with a very different world than chirping,
and buzzing, and barking, and all of that.
And you wind up with a very different version
of this gene where you can trace out how many amino acid
changes it took.
And every step of the way, you were
having some gradualist process.
What also this allows you to do is
look at a footprint, an echo of what the selection was like.
Important concept here.
So back to that business.
There's 64 different ways of coding for amino acids,
a couple of them are just informational, stop messages,
and stuff.
There's about 60 different ways of coding for 20 amino acids.
So on the average, each amino acid
could be coded for in three different ways.
So suppose you throw in a random mutation.
And of those, what you find is of the 60 possible mutations,
40 of them will not cause a change in the amino acid.
Statistically, 2/3 of the time, there will not be a change.
So in other words, if you scatter
a whole bunch of mutations, and you wind up
seeing 2/3 are neutral in terms of their consequence,
and 1/3 third actually causes a change in an amino acid, that's
telling you it's happening at the random expected rate
of mutations popping up that are either consequential-- changing
an amino acid-- or inconsequential-- just coding
for a different version of the same amino acid.
Now suppose you find a gene that differs.
And you look at the ways in which it differs.
And 99% of the base pair differences
over the course of this 5 million
base pair-along gene, 99% of the differences
make for a different amino acid than beforehand.
In other words, at much higher than expected rate
if this was a random process.
What is this an echo of?
Of very strong selection.
Of very strongly advantageous traits driven by these changes.
Term used-- this would be a mark of their
having been positive selection for this trait.
In other words, the changes that it has gone through
over the gazillion years has not been just
by random mutational rates of neutral.
And remember, every amino acid is coded for three ways.
If 99% of them are consequential,
there has been some major, hard ass selection going on there.
Alternatively, if you find a long gene
with a whole bunch of mutations and 99% of them are neutral,
make no change at all, what does that tell you?
This protein's function you do not want
to mess with in the slightest.
Even a minor change in the function of it, and you
don't pass on copies of your genes.
This would be stabilizing selection, negative selection,
strong selection to make sure that this gene and its function
downline as the protein does not change.
When you look at the number of changes, the burst of mutations
over the last quarter million years or so that differentiated
Fox P2 in humans from these other species,
it's almost entirely evidences of positive selection.
This did not just happen by chance.
Every step of coming up with these new versions,
these new amino acids in the sequence there,
clearly were ones that were positively selected for.
A lot of selection brought about this huge difference.
OK.
So that begins to give the sense here of how
these little changes can occur.
At this point, we have to go through one
of the all time confusing things in genetics out there,
which is something two factoids and two soundbites
that seemingly totally contradict with each other.
You share, on the average, 50% of your DNA
with a full sibling.
You share 98% of your DNA with chimpanzees.
What's up with that?
That seems a little bit unexpected.
And those are two soundbites that everybody knows.
Everybody knows it goes through like basic Mendel.
50%, 100% with an identical twin, 50% with a full sibling.
You know that song and dance by now.
And meanwhile, one of the great soundbites
of our evolutionary history, and the mark of evolution, and what
in hell are you creationists thinking,
is the fact that, oh, humans share 98% of their DNA
with chimps.
This doesn't make any sense.
One minute here to be spent on just clarifying that one that
is not contradictory at all.
Genes specify by way of proteins--
and now this is taking a bunch of leaps
down there-- traits, aspects.
Gene specify, to be totally simplifying here,
genes specify for antlers, for dorsal fins,
for petals, and pistils and stamens, for kidneys,
for-- it's totally simplifying.
So right off the bat, you will have some genetic similarities
between two different species in that both of them
will have genes that code for dorsal fins.
You're thinking about two different species of whales.
So they share genes coding for dorsal fins.
Whales have dorsal fins.
Neither we nor chimpanzees have genes for dorsal fins.
Meanwhile, we have genes coding for a pelvis that
has a certain shape which either in chimps
predisposes towards being able to walk bipedal
for certain strengths of the length of time.
Us as well.
You don't find these genes in apple trees.
They don't have pelvises that are shaped like those,
so they don't have.
So when you look at the human and the chimp genome,
98% of the genes code for similar kind of things.
We share with chimps an absence of genes
for antlers, and trunks, and tusks, and wings,
or serve who knows what.
And we share all sorts of other genes
in common having to do with our shared immune systems,
et cetera, et cetera.
So 98% of the genes code for similar types of things.
So that's where we get the 98% similarity with the chimps
from.
For each one of those genes, it could
come in a couple of different flavors,
a bunch of different flavors.
And thus asking not to do both you and your full sibling
have a gene for opposable thumbs, do you
and your sibling have the same type
of gene for opposable thumbs?
So suddenly that's a different world
of variants on each type of gene.
So when talking about the amount of DNA shared in common,
the genes shared in common with other species, what you're
talking about are the types of genes
coding for the types of traits.
When we're talking about, from last week's notion,
50%, 25%, 12.5%, one brother and eight cousins,
what you're talking about are different versions
of particular genes.
Important clarification.
So final thing here before the break, which is once again,
notice with these models, these point mutations,
where you can get slight differences in function.
And thanks to a 1% difference in fitness and number
of copies of genes, you get these gradualist changes.
What's intrinsic in that, and where
we get the political theme coming through is,
thus there's competition everywhere.
In terms of the evolution of behavior,
the evolution of species, every little bit of genetic advantage
will play out in some competitive way
in some little bit of an increase
in reproductive success.
OK.
Whoa, there's a lot of Apples there lit up.
Well, that wasn't very subtle.
Let's take a break.
Whoever did that.
OK, a five minute break.
Are you slightly more fit by the rules
of your population's natural selection, sexual selection,
whatever?
Even if that gives you a tiny advantage
thanks to this tiny change in this tiny gene,
enough generations go by, and that trait
is going to become more prevalent.
Final point there intrinsic in this, is if every little bit
of difference matters in terms of fitness and gene
distribution within the realm of behavior,
every little bit of competition matters.
A very, very intertwined political, philosophical stance
in gradualism as it applies to evolution.
So that's been sitting there around forever.
And in the 1980s, suddenly a very different model emerged.
And this came from Stephen Jay Gould, who
we heard about the other day.
Stephen Jay Gould, and the person,
the poor schnook who was always lost in this,
another evolutionary biologist named Niles Eldridge who
somehow did not quite have the press that Stephen Jay
Gould did, so he is lost to history except for people
who know what he's up to.
And he's an amazing scientist.
But Gould and Eldridge came up with a very different model.
And I alluded to it the other day and drew it right there.
And their notion was that gradualism is nonsense.
There are not gradualistic incremental changes.
Evolution is not being driven by small gradualist changes.
Instead, what their model was is that there's
long periods of nothing happening, of stasis.
Long periods of nothing happening.
If there's changes in DNA sequences thanks to mutations,
they're not consequential.
Or if they're consequential enough
to change the fitness of one organism 1%,
that's not going to make a difference.
Most of the time, no change is occurring.
And when it does occur, it is in incredibly fast,
explosive periods of change followed
by a new period of stasis.
Evolutionary change comes in step functions rather than
smooth gradualism.
Long periods of stasis followed by dramatic jumps
of evolutionary change in short periods of time.
Thus, they called this the notion
of punctuated equilibrium.
Long periods of equilibrium and stasis
punctuated by periods of very rapid change.
And as I mentioned the other day, Gould was a Marxist
and felt that Marxist's sort of stance
was running through all of the ways to think about genetics.
And I don't now what's up with Niles Eldredge,
but that was the case with Gould.
And when you look at this model, this
is like classically fitting with stasis,
and revolutionary change, and dialectical materialism,
and stuff like that.
The last sentence, I have no idea what I just said.
But apparently that's got something
to do with that stuff.
And once again, we see in a very different way,
a political theme running through a different worlds
view of what evolution is about-- punctuated equilibrium.
OK, so where did the idea of punctuated equilibrium
come to these guys?
Mainly because Gould was not a biologist.
He was certainly not an evolutionary biologist.
What he was a paleontologist.
He studied fossils.
He studied the history, the evolutionary history
of fossils.
And apparently, like totally separate
of his large theoretical models, he
was like the world's expert on the evolution
of some Caribbean snail shell over the last 10 billion years
or something.
He's one of those paleontologists who
traces lineages of evolutionary change over the course of time
with fossils, fossil records, as the readout.
So he's a paleontologist slash geologist in some ways.
And when you do that, you notice something, which is you've
got gaps in the record.
You've got your famed missing links.
You have gaps in your evolutionary record
there of what fossils look like.
And you're measuring some trait or other in these snails,
or trilobites, or whatever you're looking at.
And at this time period, the trait looks like this.
At this time period, it looks like this.
And this looks like a perfectly good gradualist model.
And what Gould would notice is as the field got
more and more information, more and more intervening steps
on a lot of these fossil histories,
they would start to look more like this.
And every now and then, you would see something
like this in between.
And from that, that begin to suggest to him this model
of punctuated equilibrium.
Most of the time, as assessed by the fossil record,
nothing dramatic is happening-- long periods of stasis.
And what allowed this to occur is that for some fossils,
you have incredibly detailed evolutionary history, where
you can begin to fill in lines, and they wind up
looking punctuated in this way.
So out of him comes this whole theory
that it's all about punctuated equilibrium rather than
gradualism.
Right off the bat, what are the consequences of that?
Little genetic changes don't matter.
Competition driven by the notion of little changes mattering
aren't actually occurring.
In model [? saying ?] most of the time, all
of the notions of if you figure out the right kid to kidnap
when the big guy is coming at you,
and you'll leave more copies, and figuring out
exactly who to be infanticidal to, all that,
it's not going to make a difference
in terms of gene distribution.
Evolution is not being driven by that.
And out of it came this very strong indictment
of the sociobiological view of what you've
got there is a world where it's all about competition, where
it's all about hierarchy, where it's all about domination,
where it's all about that.
Hey, isn't that interesting that that's exactly
the sort of world that these folks live
in who are benefiting from this, who started this theory?
Very different notion here.
Competition, selective advantages, all of that,
most of the time, nothing's happening.
So not surprisingly, all of the evolutionary types
from last week did not like this one bit.
And this was an attacked left and right
in some extremely valid ways.
First one, first form of attack is a very simple problem there,
which is that you have two different disciplines happening
here.
You get a paleontologist, and you
get a evolutionary biologist, and they're
functioning in completely different universes.
OK, stomach problems.
And they're functioning in completely different universes
there.
What counts as fast for a paleontologist--
these are tens of millions of years going on.
Whoa, incredibly fast evolutionary change
going on there.
That's like 100,000 years.
That's like, are you kidding me?
Said the biologists.
The ones who study one generation at a time.
That is asinine.
That is ridiculous.
This is them imposing models where
this has absolutely nothing to do with how evolution actually
works.
These geologists get completely thrown off,
and these paleontologists led by Gould, simply
orders of magnitude different scale of time.
Yeah, maybe in some rough approximation of what
they look at.
But they're not studying evolution,
because they're not biologists.
Next critique-- the next one made lots of sense also.
Which was, you're not just an evolutionary biologist,
but you're one who thinks about the evolution of the brain,
or the evolution of skin melanism,
or the evolution of eye color, or the evolution of how
many chambers in your heart you're going to have,
or the evolution of any of these things
that will leave no record whatsoever
in the paleontological record.
Because all paleontology is about
is shapes of stuff-- fossils.
Fossils do not tell you what kind of brain
was going on inside that fern.
Fossils do not tell you anything about internal organs.
Fossils do not tell you anything about behavior.
So at this point, all of the evolutionary folks
of the school from last week attack and say, Yeah,
what do they expect?
They're studying the most boring possible things--
the morphology of organisms.
Ooh, just because the fact that humans,
over the last like million years or so, have not
evolved getting rid of the large trunk and roots
that they have during springtime,
and now they don't have them.
Oh, that morphological change didn't occur,
so obviously there's been stasis.
Give me a break.
What is interesting about evolution
and evolutionary change, paleontologists
can't pick up, because all they can study
are forms, morphology.
So that was a big attack on these folks.
So you've got the Gouldian folks,
the punctuated equilibrium people,
saying when you look at the fossil record,
it's not gradualism.
And we've got some really complete ones.
And to this day, the majority of fossil pedigrees
where there are very, very complete
records, show patterns of punctuated equilibrium.
And back come the rejoinders, this is ridiculous,
the time span they talk about.
That makes no sense.
In this period, humans evolved, doubled their brain size
in the length of time that they call a very rapid
evolutionary change.
Their time span is completely crazy,
and they can't study the evolution of anything
that's interesting because they study fossils.
But in lots of ways, the best rebuttal,
the one that most got at these folks
advocating punctuated equilibrium,
would be the gradualists saying, Show me a molecular mechanism.
Show me some way in which you can get rapid change and then
long stasis.
Turn that into modern molecular biology.
Which is, occurring two minutes after
the microevolutionary people were trashing the folks
from last week saying, You need to look for the actual genes.
It's not enough just to make up stories.
And once these folks had assimilated what evolution
looks like on the genetic level, mutational level,
micromutational changes, they loved genetics.
They loved the molecular end of it,
because they could now turn around to the Gouldians
and say, Show me the genes, and show me the mutations that will
account for stuff like this.
Because you can't account for it.
Because we all know classical genetics and mutation,
you don't get that.
You get gradualism.
So this was a period of enormous hostility between the two
camps.
And the gradualists called the punctuated equilibrium people
evolutionary jerks.
Ha ha.
And the punctuated equilibrium people
called the gradualists creeps.
So ultimately, they all got along wonderfully
because they were so witty.
But what you had was enormously hostile camps.
And really quite hostile because all
sorts of implications spreading beyond
like how fast the shape of this seashell
was going to be evolving.
And when they first came on in the '80s, all
of this controversy, the punctuated equilibrium people
didn't have a word to say with the show
me the molecular mechanisms.
Show me mechanisms for mutation that will produce rapid change.
And everything that has occurred since then
in the world of molecular genetics
that has been most striking has supported punctuated models--
ways in which the micromutational,
microevolutionary stuff of an hour ago
is not what's going on an awful lot of the time.
Starters-- so simple classical model.
What we've got here is a stretch of DNA.
And this box symbolizes a sequence
of DNA coding for one gene.
And right next to it, once it finishes,
one of those stop codon, stop triplet signals,
right after that comes the stretch
of DNA coding for the next gene, and the next gene.
And this is what DNA is about.
It's the sequence genes there.
And what you would obviously then get
is this arrow having this intervening step of that RNA
stuff, but eventually producing an amino acid that produces
a protein of this shape.
And this is the protein coded for by this gene.
This, this, and so on, and that's exactly how it works.
That's the structure of DNA.
Then, though, people began to find that that's not
the structure of DNA.
And what you began to get instead
was something vastly more interesting.
Which is that, for starters, when
you look at coding for one single gene,
it's not necessarily coded for in one continuous stretch
of DNA.
In other words, it's broken into little pieces.
And you will have a stretch of DNA
coding for the first third of the protein,
and then a bunch of DNA that's got nothing to do with it.
Stay tuned.
Then coding for the next third, coding for the next third,
that the gene was broken up into separate coding domains.
And the term that was given for these was these
were called exons.
And the in-between boring stuff were called introns.
And this was a major finding which made no sense whatsoever.
Because how are you going to get from this to then having
a protein which has its normal sequence and shape
where this part was coded for by this exon, Exon
One of this gene, and this from Exon Two, this from Exon Three.
That's a completely different world of stuff.
How are you going to do that?
Because you're going to meet an RNA
that's going to encompass all of this,
and that's going to code for something completely different
because you've got these introns in between there.
And people then guessed something
had to exist which was soon discovered-- enzymes
called splicing enzymes.
And what they did was exactly what
you need to do to solve this.
Which is at the RNA level, the splicing enzymes
would come along, and they would snip out the part corresponding
to here.
And another would snip out there.
And another one as an enzyme catalyzing
would stick this two pieces together.
And thus you have this.
This utterly bizarre world in which
genes, the vast majority of them,
are not coded for in a continuous stretch of DNA
but instead are broken up into these separate exons.
And then you need these splicing enzymes to clip out
the boring in-between parts, the introns,
stick them all together, and you've
got your functional gene.
Weird.
OK, but that's how they work though.
I know shortly after these were discovered
that one of the giants in this business, guy named
David Baltimore who got the Nobel Prize for some
of the work on that reverse process of RNA
viruses turning back to DNA, he was
the first to really appreciate that what you've got here
is a potential for a lot of information.
Because of, and I think he was the first person
to introduce this word into thinking about it, because
of the modular construction of genes.
Because genes come in these separate exons.
What does that begin to allow you to do?
Very important stuff.
OK, so we have the same structure here.
And we have a gene coded for in a modular way
in three separate exons.
And thanks to splicing enzymes, protein catalysts clipping this
out, you wind up with this.
What Baltimore was the first or one of the first to appreciate
was that you could wind up with something different
there as well.
You could, for example, create a very different protein--
one consisting only of A and B. Or one
consisting only of A and C. Or one consisting of B and C,
or A alone.
And suddenly, you have this combinatorial possibility
of cranking out a number of different ways of putting
together-- seven different ways since you can't transcribe
this gene so that there's no transcription-- seven
different ways of combining these different exons.
Seven different types of proteins
you could generate from the same gene.
This was not accepted with a whole lot of pleasure
by the old guard.
Because intrinsic in the know the DNA sequence specifies
amino acid, protein shape, protein function,
intrinsic in that is one gene specifies one protein.
One gene only specifies a single protein.
One protein is only specified, coded for, by one gene.
And suddenly, this modular business
allows you with one gene to generate seven different kinds
of proteins.
For starters, how could that possibly work that way just
on a nuts and bolts level?
All you need are splicing enzymes
that work a little bit differently
in different parts of the body.
One that will splice this off and is attached
to an enzyme that will degrade this,
while the splicing enzyme here-- and what have you
just produced?
You'll get this one.
Coupling of splicing enzymes with degradative enzymes,
and suddenly you've got a means to have
tissue-specific expression of genes.
The same gene will produce different types
of proteins in different parts of the body
because of splicing enzymes working differently.
Then, just to confuse things even more,
people began to note that there would be some splicing enzymes
and genes where they would splice at a different point.
And you would now have a gene with A, and A prime,
and other splicing enzymes that would cut at other points.
One single sequence of DNA generating all sorts
of different types of proteins in different parts of the body,
at different times of life, under different circumstances,
in different individuals in different ways.
Suddenly, there's a lot more information floating around
in there.
So that was a huge, huge breakthrough in the field,
understanding this modular basis of gene construction.
And for our purposes right now, what
the most interesting consequence of that is is it's no longer
one gene, one protein.
One gene instead can generate all sorts
of different types of proteins, different settings,
different circumstances.
The next thing that was intrinsic in this model that's
now been trashed of one continuous gene, one
continuous gene-- what we just figured out that instead you
can have the introns, exons, all of that.
The next thing that went down the tubes was looking at, Well,
how much of DNA is actually devoted
to coding for amino acids?
And the answer was obvious, like 99.9% each.
One of these would just have to have a stop codon, a stop
signal at the end.
And otherwise, this was just a continuous flow of information
once you have factored in these interim things.
OK, so they're part of this gene,
but immediately starts the next one.
The next major discovery was one gene
would very rarely start immediately after the next one.
There would be long stretches of DNA in between
that didn't code for a protein-- non-coding DNA.
That's mighty puzzling.
What's that?
Just junk or stuff?
And around that time, the phrase junk DNA
was actually floating around.
People trying to make sense of this.
And when people sat and started actually
like doing the numbers, out came a number
that knocked people on their rears it was so flabbergasting.
95% of DNA is non-coding.
95% does not code for a gene specifying a protein.
In other words, in between here on the average
would be a stretch of DNA 19 times the length of that,
or whatever the math winds up being.
And suddenly calling that stuff junk DNA starting to see me
a little bit tenuous, because 95% your DNA
just can't be packing material for the whole thing.
It's got to be doing something.
And during that period, became sort of the insight
into this that all the intervening, non-coding stuff
was-- what was that?
That was the instruction booklet.
That was the instruction booklet on when
to activate these genes.
That was the on and off switches for turning genes on or off.
Upstream in the non-coding domain
just above a particular gene sequence
would be the information for when that gene is activated.
Activated when it makes RNA into protein, all of that.
And upstream of that are the on and off switches.
Implication right there off the bat, which is Crick was wrong.
DNA sequences are not the starting point
of the central dogma of life.
And DNA is the rule-giver and all of that.
DNA is being regulated.
Genes are being regulated in some other way.
And where 95% of DNA is being devoted
to regulation of the genes.
DNA has no idea what it's doing.
DNA is a readout that's under the control
of all sorts of other factors.
And out of this emerged the really, really important
concepts of regulatory sequences upstream from genes.
So here we have a long string of DNA coding for this gene which
happens to come in two exons.
And it is like the space between the galaxy
how long the non-coding is going to go on until the next gene is
back there.
So what's going on in the stretch
just upstream from this gene?
Things that were soon being called
stuff like promoter sequences or repressor sequences.
Things, stretches of DNA, that coded for switches
rather than coding for protein.
That coded for things coming into the neighborhood
of the DNA and binding to some of these promoter or repressor
sequences, and then turning on, or in some cases off,
the transcription of that gene, the process of the gene
generating proteins.
You would have promoters sitting there.
And this is overly literal.
It would be just a sequence of DNA,
which thanks to that sequence would have
a certain subtle microshape.
And along would come something which
happened to be able to fit perfectly into that spot.
And if, and only if, this molecule-- usually a protein--
bound to this promoter, suddenly that
would trigger a whole bunch of enzymes
to come in, which would start the process of transcribing
this gene.
This would be the switch, and this is the thing
that just turned the switch on.
And these things that turn these switches on, or off
in some cases, were soon called transcription factors.
Totally critical concept in there-- the fact
that vast stretches of DNA don't code for anything.
Instead, they have the instruction booklets.
Here's how you turn this gene on or off.
Send in this molecular messenger.
Send in this type of transcription factor.
And if it shows up, binds to here,
you now activate the transcription
of this gene, the process of turning that gene,
making proteins derived from it.
This is where the information was.
And this is not DNA knowing what it's doing.
This is outside regulators coming in.
So immediately, that has made life
a whole lot more complicated.
Next complications-- you could have different genes
scattered all over the place that
would have the same promoter upstream of it.
What would that mean?
In comes a transcription factor, and it
doesn't activate the transcription of one
gene producing one protein.
It activates the transcription of a whole bunch of them.
In other words, now suddenly we have messengers
that could trigger activation of genetic networks, entire arrays
of proteins being produced all with a functional similarity
driven by the fact that all of them
have the same promoter upstream.
So suddenly, you have the possibility
of the same promoter being upstream
regulating more than one gene.
That is the general rule.
Flip side of it, any given gene, for example,
could have a bunch of different promoters responding
to different types of signals.
So now, suddenly, you have this gene
which can be transcribed under this circumstance,
or under this circumstance.
And both are ways of turning on activation of that gene.
And in this circumstance, the same promoter
is found in Genes A, B, and C somewhere at the other end
of the chromosome.
And in this case, this promoter is
found on Genes D, E, and F down there-- different networks.
So the same sort of transcription factor logic--
once you can have different promoters upstream of a gene,
and once you can have the same promoter upstream
for multiple genes, you suddenly have the ability
with different transcription factors
to activate entire networks of gene expression.
OK.
So what this has allowed you to do
is completely trash this notion of DNA knows what it's doing.
DNA is just the readout.
And who knows what's going on?
Whatever is controlling the transcription factors.
Whatever is causing them to do their thing.
And this could be a world of influences.
And to be absolutely accurate, this
requires introducing the word environment.
This is environment having something
to do with genetic effects.
This is going to be a way in which environment
is interacting with genetic elements, environment
determining which of these are doing what.
What would that look like?
Sometimes environment could be the environment
in the rest of this cell.
So you've got your DNA there, and your structures,
and all of that, and the promoter.
And we could do that by now.
And something is occurring inside the cell which activates
some transcription factor.
And then you go change a genetic event going on in there.
The cell is running out of energy.
There's various ways to construct sensors.
In other words, evolution has come up
with a bunch of different ways in which cells can respond
to signals of low energy, and that
will activate some transcription factor which will go
and bind to a bunch of promoters which produce proteins involved
in taking up more energy from outside the cell, transporting
in more, using energy more efficiently.
So what we have here is an environmental regulation
of genetic effects.
Environment-- the rest of the environment of the cell.
The DNA doesn't know what it's doing.
The gene doesn't know what it's doing.
Events going on elsewhere in the cell
is what's regulating what's up.
Some of the time, the environment
can be even more far flung.
And in this case, it's now events going on
outside just this one cell.
In this case now, you've got the cell with it's DNA.
And now, instead, you have a chemical messenger
coming from somewhere else.
And binds to its receptor like a lock and key.
And as a result of this binding, something
happens here, which does something here,
which does something here, which eventually
activates some transcription factor, which goes and does
its thing.
Now we have gene expression in the cell being regulated
by the environment somewhere else in the body,
somewhere else there.
What would be a classic example of that?
This is what a whole lot hormones do.
Hormones go floating around.
And they affect cells everywhere throughout the body.
By definition, a hormone is a bloodborne chemical messenger.
So you could secrete some hormone out
of the top of your ear, and it will affect things
in your little toe.
Very far flung.
Hormones will bind to their receptors, lock and key.
Most hormones are protein in nature,
and trigger what's called a second messenger cascade.
Jargon, don't worry about it.
Just get it conceptually.
Activate some transcription factor,
deactivate some other transcription factor.
And suddenly, events going on 14 counties over there
are regulating what proteins are being made in this cell.
What would be an example of that?
Testosterone, for example.
Testosterone secreted from the testes,
traveling far and wide and eventually binding to androgen
receptors on muscle.
And what happens there is through a pathway like this,
turning on the activation of genes, coding for proteins,
all sorts of structural proteins that will
make that muscle cell bigger.
Your muscles are getting bigger thanks to testosterone.
Look at this.
Events occurring a gazillion cells away in the testes,
a messenger here, determining what gene expression,
what gene activation is happening.
Sometimes, though, the environment
could be completely outside the organism.
Like that.
Sometimes you can have, for example, a messenger
from the outside world.
What sort of messenger?
A scary sight.
A bit of sensory information or whatever.
Olfactory.
Olfactory-- suppose some odorant comes in.
A pheromone-- you're female rat who has recently given birth,
and the pheromones from your babies
come floating in and bind to receptors here.
Very similar principle, again.
And that causes them to activate something, activate something,
and some cell down there.
And eventually there is a cell here
that controls some muscles, and it
makes your eyes dilate because you
love the smell of your baby.
And you're just-- I don't know if rats have their eyes dilate.
But humans will in many other circumstances.
Aha, how do you do that?
You just changed some structural proteins that did this or that.
Or suddenly this female is making
some hormone like oxytocin as a result of smelling her baby.
What have we got here?
We got something going on in the outside world regulating
what's going on with the genes.
Genes as the central dogma of life,
as the information giver-- nonsense.
Events going on in the rest of the cell,
the rest of the organism, the rest of the universe,
are determining when genes activate.
So what we see now is a much more interesting world
of regulation of gene expression.
First, the modular ability for one gene
to generate all sorts of different proteins, which
brings up an issue after a while is, does that
count as one gene?
And people argue over that.
And because of this 95% regulatory sequence business,
the most interesting stuff going on with DNA
is not what the protein is like, not what the protein does,
not how well the protein does it,
but when it does it, in what contexts.
And what we've just introduced are if then clauses
into this whole world.
If you get a signal that there is low glucose in the cell,
then you begin to make proteins related to glucose uptake.
If you have the smell of your child come in,
then you activate this [? path. ?]
It's not changing what the protein is like.
It's changing context.
And I think what we will see is context is vastly more
interesting than whether this protein is a little bit more
like this, a little bit more like that.
If it is being expressed instead at a different time,
in a different place, in a different context,
that's much more interesting.
So what does that set us up for here?
Now beginning to see the organization of this.
By the way-- 95%, this whole stuff here.
I don't know what percentage is accounted
for by identified promoters, and repressors, and stuff.
But it's a tiny percentage.
What that means is there's regulatory stuff going on
that no one has a clue about.
The main thing, though, here is modulatory structure
to genes-- introns, exons-- and this whole world
of the environment regulating when
genes are turned on and off.
A whole world where you could generate
completely different proteins.
Not a protein that's a little bit more this way,
a little bit more that way, in completely different contexts.
So all we need to do now is begin
to stick this into the molecular biology of mutations
and evolutionary change.
Where does this begin?
Oh, no, before we do that, that's not
what we're going to do.
We're going to look at one more level of regulation here.
OK, so you've got your DNA.
And we already know this whole business.
What's telling it what to do.
You can have transcription factors coming in,
all of that, these interesting implications.
DNA-- let's see.
For our purposes, protected in sort of layers of protein
that are just sort of structurally stabilizing.
This is not really what they look like or quite
what they're made of, but they're called chromatin.
There's this stuff that stabilizes the DNA.
Because these are wispy little things.
And one of the things that, of course, they need to do
is they're in wrapped around the DNA stabilizing.
You've got some transcription factor coming in from somewhere
else in the cell.
It's got to be able to get down to the DNA.
And thus, you have a whole world of chomatin opening up
to allow transcription factors to get through.
And thus, you have a whole world of what's telling the chromatin
to open up where and when?
Suddenly, a whole world of regulation,
of whether the transcription factors
even have access to the DNA.
So you can have tons of a transcription factor,
and all set to transcribe something off of this.
And thanks to conformational changes, folding or unfolding
of chromatin, you're regulating whether the transcription
factor can even get through.
And thus, there's a whole world of stuff
that changes chromatin modeling and remodeling.
Additional step here, one that's really interesting,
is you can do things-- circumstances [? arise, ?]
the environment can do things-- where you change
the structure of chromatin around a particular gene
in a way that makes it easier to transcribe,
or harder to transcribe.
And you can essentially make that change permanent.
You could permanently do something
in some particular stretch of chromatin
so it will never open up again to allow the transcription
factor in.
And what you have just done-- jargon--
is you have silenced that gene.
You've silenced it permanently.
And people know a lot of the mechanisms for how this occurs.
For those who care about such things,
the process is called methylation.
This is a little bit different.
That's occurring with the DNA itself.
But this is silencing of genes by structural access
of transcription factors to it.
When does that occur?
There's all sorts of circumstances early in life
where you will change the permanent accessibility
of some gene and transcription factors.
You will cause long-term, lifelong changes.
As but one example, and one that we
will look at a number of times down the pike there,
in rats, the mothering style of the mother rats,
will cause chromatin changes-- permanent ones--
in some of the genes related to stress hormones.
So that certain types of mothering-- how often you
lick the baby, and other rat mother type stuff--
will regulate how readily some genes will be turned
on for the rest of your life.
This is early experience.
This is molecular mechanisms for events early in life
lasting forever.
A lot of these turn out to be a little bit reversible.
But for our purposes, lasting forever.
This is a whole new field called epigenetics.
Genetics is all about DNA sequences.
Epigenetics is all about regulation
of access to DNA sequences, things of that sort.
So suddenly this epigenetic world
is entirely capable of overriding anything going on
at the transcription factor end.
Just to give you a sense of this-- researcher.
This is a guy at the National Institute of Health--
a guy named Steve Sumi who studies
primate social behavior.
And what he has shown is in monkeys,
in one part of their brain, you change the style
of mothering that that monkey is subject to as a baby,
and you will change the conformational access
state of 4,000 different genes.
Enormously influential there.
Enormous arrays of ways of regulating where it's not
genetics, it's epigenetics.
And this has given rise to a great phrase-- fertilization
is all about genetics.
Development is all about epigenetics.
And what epigenetics is about are
ways in which the environment not only can regulate what's
going on with this gene right now,
but can cause lifelong differences in the ability
to access genes.
So this is an enormous array of levels of regulation.
Splicing enzymes determining how your exons
get mixed and matched, generating all sorts
of different proteins.
Transcription factors representing the things
that turn the switches on and off, and the array of switches
is far more interesting and plentiful than the gene itself.
Transcription factors reflecting what's
going on in the outside world, like in the rest of the cell
to the other side of the planet.
And finally, this whole additional level
of regulation where some of the regulatory consequences
here can be lifelong.
Enormous array of levels of regulation.
And an enormous number of ways in which
just the DNA sequence of the gene itself
is not very interesting.
That determines the shape of the protein.
All this other stuff is where is it
expressed, when is it expressed, in what
contexts, what sort of if then contingencies,
whether it is ever expressed after a certain childhood
event.
All of that much much more interesting.
So what we need to do now is transition
to thinking about evolution, mutations,
on the level of all the stuff we just heard about.
And all I will leave you with and picking up on Wednesday,
is think about what if you get a mutation in a splicing enzyme?
What if you get a mutation in a transcription factor?
What if you get a mutation not in the letters
coding for a gene, but coding for a promoter?
What happens in all those cases?
And suddenly you begin to see a world
in which you can get stuff that's not purely gradual.
 Let's see.
Various announcements.
I am out of town tomorrow, so no office hours.
I managed effortlessly to confuse a whole bunch of people
Monday about positive selection versus stabilizing selection.
All of that on the Q&A part of the course works.
I've pulled out the paragraphs from the extended readings
that explain that coherently, as opposed to what happened here.
And Monday-- Monday I discovered that somebody sitting in this
room, who I cannot spot at the moment,
has a spectacular tattoo illustrating the central dogma
of life, or at least one person.
If there's two, it's really something.
So amazing demonstration of DNA to RNA to protein.
So if the person doesn't have a class afterward,
he will be standing up on top of this counter
here displaying it for everybody's
educational purposes.
So besides finding about that guy, what else happened Monday?
Monday we introduced two concepts
and, with great dramatic foreshadowing,
started to trash both.
The first one being this huge emphasis
in all of the preceding lectures on the evolution of behavior--
not only this emphasis on adaptation,
not only this emphasis on inferring a genetic basis
through that roundabout-- here's a story
and until you make up a better one, I win.
But also that emphasis on gradualism,
that slow evolutionary change.
What we focused on there was what
would be the mechanisms, the molecular mechanisms,
for classic gradualist evolutionary change,
microevolution, the whole world of point mutations-- deletion,
insertion, all of that, the whole world of mutations
potentially being big news, knocking a protein completely
out of business and suddenly you've
got a different gender than you actually are chromosomally,
but a world, none the less, where for our soundbite,
micromutations are affecting how readily a protein does
its job-- how strongly, how potently, how long,
what its job is, all of that, that
as sort of the grist for the microevolutionary change.
What we then transitioned to was the huge, huge attack
on the gradualism that came with this view
of punctuated equilibrium, this notion
that most of the time, nothing exciting was happening,
long periods of stasis, and then sudden, dramatic change
proposed by Gould, other evolutionary people.
And what we saw was the huge implication.
There it was.
If most of the time, nothing interesting
is happening in terms of evolutionary shift,
there goes gradualism, there goes
the emphasis of every bit of adaptation
is going to make a difference long term, every, opportunity
to compete, compete and dominate,
is going to make a difference.
All of that goes down the drain if 99% of the time,
there is instead equilibrium stasis.
What we saw were the wildly enthused attacks upon it
along the grounds of that stasis and rapid change
for paleontologists bears no resemblance
to what the world is like for an evolutionary biologist.
Paleontologists can only see the evolution of boring stuff--
morphology.
You miss the entire world of what's going on
inside that morphology.
And the most damning sort of complaint,
show me some molecular mechanisms
for these macroevolutionary changes.
What we then transitioned to was seeing all the ways
in which the picture of the structure of genes and DNA
is completely wrong along the lines of there's
the intervening sequences, the intron/exon organization
of genes.
Suddenly the opportunity to mix and match
combinatorial abilities for one gene, or at least one
stretch of DNA, to specify a whole bunch
of different proteins, depending on the function of the splicing
enzymes, and those splicing enzymes
differing in different parts of the body
under different circumstances.
We then saw that flabbergasting business about 95% of DNA
not coding for proteins, not being genes, but instead,
the instruction manuals, the promoters, the switching
on and off, leading to that critical notion
of transcription factors transducing events going on
out there, out there outside the nucleus, outside the cell,
outside the organism, into changes in DNA,
and thus the incredibly important role of transcription
factors, promoters.
There are a lock and key interactions.
All that sorts of stuff introducing
the second critical concept-- if microevolution
is about sort of changing the function of a protein, changes
occurring at the level of transcription factors
or promoters, those are about changing
the context for which proteins are functioning
when genes are expressing.
What they are about are introducing if/then clauses.
If this is happening outside the nucleus, cell, universe,
whatever, then if that results in this gene being activated,
then you will see that response.
What came along sort of de facto with that,
the second major thing that we thus trashed,
was DNA as the central starting point, the dogma of life.
DNA is the only one who knows what's going on out there.
DNA commands, RNA commands, protein commands all of life.
And what we saw was DNA, genes, are just a readout
and most of what it's about is environmental regulation
of when genes activate.
Finally we began to see all sorts of ways of futzing around
with gene expression that has nothing
to do with the sequences of DNA, but instead
has to do with things like access of transcription factors
to the DNA, changing accessibility permanently,
that whole world of epistatic, epigenetic changes,
coming up with that sound soundbite.
Fertilization is about genetics.
Development is about epigenetics-- all of that
combining to show, number one, genes
are not such a hot deal in terms of them knowing what's up.
Number two, in addition to mechanisms
known for microevolutionary change,
we left just on the cusp of seeing how all of this stuff
can set you up for some big time macroevolutionary changes.
First example of it.
First way in which that could occur.
So back to the modular construction of genes.
We've got our introns, exons, all of that.
And what we learned the other day is here
we've got a gene coded for with three exons.
You produce a messenger RNA that encompasses
all of these plus the introns.
Along comes a specific splicing enzyme, knocks out these parts,
and here is the mature protein.
So that's great.
What if you have a mutation in your splicing factor,
in your splicing enzyme, and as a result,
instead of clipping here, it ignores those and clips
here instead.
What do you get?
You get two completely novel proteins
that never existed before in this cell, in this individual.
What you've got there is not some sort
of little microevolutionary change.
This is not a protein working a little bit better
or a little bit more sluggish.
This is the invention of entirely new proteins.
So what we see here is splicing factors working differently.
And this is a major change, if whatever
went on in the outside world that causes the then of this
being made, if you've got that mutation in the splicing
factor, you've just made entirely new if/then.
If whatever's going on in the outside world
happens to activate this, you produce these two novel
proteins.
So we've suddenly got the potential
for producing all sorts of novelty.
They're splicing enzymes, enzymes, proteins, thus there
are genes coding for the splicing enzymes.
As a result, suddenly a very different type of consequence.
Yeah, question?
How often do those [INAUDIBLE] make it out of the [INAUDIBLE]?
Great question.
How often do they make their way out of the--
[INAUDIBLE]
What was that?
How often do the mis-splice [INAUDIBLE]
successfully have function?
Do they have any function?
[INAUDIBLE]
That's a critical question.
Wait about an hour and 17 minutes
and you will get the answer to it-- the answer being,
not very often.
Oops.
I gave it away.
The answer being not very often.
And we're going to see why that's
real critical to punctuated equilibrium.
So we see one realm of major consequence.
And intrinsic in that is, wait a second-- so if splicing
enzymes, enzymes are genes.
There's a gene for the splicing enzyme.
And that gene has its promoters.
And that gene maybe is in a number of exons.
And thus it needs a splicing factor.
And we're rolling all the way down there.
Recursive regulation.
So one splicing factor, big consequence.
Next realm where you can have a big consequence
is now you've got a mutation in a promoter.
A whole world of a mutation in a noncoding part of your DNA.
And you can immediately run with that one.
Have a different promoter, and it's
going to interact with a different transcription factor.
And we go back to that business about typically a promoter,
the same version of it, multiple copies of that promoter,
appear upstream of various different genes-- promoters
mediating expression of entire network of proteins.
Change that promoter and you're going to change the network.
Change that promoter in only some of the places
where it occurs and now you've created
a completely novel network, a network consisting maybe
of half of the proteins that you would have
made in the unmutated version.
Mutate every single version of it,
and maybe it's an entirely different transcription
factor that interacts with that promoter.
And thus we've made an entirely new if/then clause--
not just a new if/then make a never seen before protein.
Now it's an if this happens, then make
a network of proteins that have never existed before,
a combination of these that have never occurred before.
What we're beginning to see here is
a theme of amplifying affects.
Huge, major consequences, instead of
one little protein which, thanks to one little base pair
changing, is 1 and 1/2 degrees more
folded this way instead of that way
and 1.5% better at binding this or that hormone.
That's the microevolutionary this is setting up
for big network changes.
Novel genes, novel networks, novel if/then clauses.
Third range-- an example of why promoters and promoter
mutations are interesting.
Later on in the course, we are going to hear about one
of the all time interesting differences
that you can have in one of your promoters
if you happen to be a vole and, increasingly it's turning out,
equally interesting if you happen to be a human.
This is a promoter upstream of a gene
having to do with the hormone vasopressin.
Do not panic or care if you haven't heard of this yet.
But you will have in more detail within a few weeks.
Vasopressin is this hormone which has something
or other to do with social affiliated behavior in males
and all sorts of interesting stuff with that.
And naturally, it being a hormone,
out there is a vasopressin receptor.
And thus, there's a vasopressin receptor gene.
And there's a promoter upstream of that gene
which turns out to come in a couple of different flavors.
And you look at voles, which are a little hamster thingee
sort of things.
And there's all sorts of different vole species.
And there's ones in the mountains,
and there's ones in the plains, and there's
ones from California to the New York islands.
And there's all these different species.
And it happens some of them happened to be monogamous.
Some of them happen to be polygamous.
We're off and running with the social biology of that
and how many imprinted genes and all that they're going to have.
But a critical difference in monogamous vole species--
there is a different promoter upstream
of the vasopressin receptor gene than you
find in the polygamist ones.
And go and mess around with them,
use gene therapy techniques to change the promoter
to modify it, and you could convert a polygamous male vole
into a resoundingly monogamous one.
And I don't know if this counts as gene therapy
like curing a disease or just gene transfer sort of stuff,
but what you've got here is change your promoter
and you suddenly have a different pattern
of expression, which parts of the brain it winds up in.
Suddenly you have made a major shift in behavior.
You're not causing a change in a gene.
You're causing a change in its promoter.
You've just changed a major if/then clause.
Another example of it-- there is a gene
that codes for hormone neurotransmitter that
has something to do with pain perception called dynorphin.
It's broadly related to things like morphine and such.
It's got a dynorphin gene that's a little more complicated
than that.
But there's a promoter upstream.
And recent research is showing that the number of copies
of that promoter in different rats
predicts something about how readily they become addicted
to various drugs.
And that winds up being pertinent.
Back for a second.
Back to the vasopressin gene and the vasopressin
reporter gene and it's promoter.
In the last couple of years, a number of studies come out.
One, for example, in a very credible journal
by a great group showing that if you
happen to be a human male, which version of that promoter
you have gives you a certain significant predictive power
over how stable your social relationships are going to be.
Get a load of that one.
And that one is coming later on.
Whoa.
Have a different type of promoter and statistically
you are more likely to get divorced down the line.
Back to that first lecture freewill stuff.
There is so much more to come along those lines.
We will look at the vasopressin system
much more in the sex lectures.
But again, that's not a difference in a gene.
That's a difference in the promoter.
Next domain-- we've now seen changes, subtle changes,
dramatic changes, in splicing enzymes
and the genes underlying them, changes in promoters.
Next obvious domain where you can get a macro, macro change
is a mutation in a gene for a transcription factor,
obviously.
Do that and you're going to have completely different networks.
Once again, you will have changed if/then contingencies
dramatically.
Transcription factors are very, very important, obviously.
One measure of this-- when you look
at the human genome versus the chimp genome,
and we will eventually do that in some detail and say, 98%
of our genes in common, which is kind of accurate.
And you remember from the other day how that's different.
It's the level of explanation than you
sharing 50% of your genes with your full sibling.
All of that.
Back to us sharing 90%, 98% of our DNA with chimps.
What are the differences?
And there's going to be some really interesting differences
we're going to focus on down the line.
But one of the patterns that's come out
of that is a disproportionate share
of the genetic differences between humans and chimps
are genes that code for transcription factors.
And that makes perfect sense.
You get a change in some gene coding
for some structural protein and maybe
your muscles will bend a little bit this way
instead of that way, or who knows what.
You get a change in the gene coding for transcription factor
and you will have invented all sorts of novel networks.
So a disproportionate share of what
has gone on in evolution differentiating us from chimps
are changes in transcription factors.
This was a big triumph, big support,
for a view that came out in the '80s.
There were a pair of scientists at Berkeley, King and Wilson,
and this iconic set of studies they did.
They were the first persons, people,
to come up with a 98% business there.
And using very primitive molecular techniques
that have since been affirmed-- and they also
came up with a prediction, a purely theoretical one, which
is, the most interesting changes that will occur in evolution
are in regulatory parts of DNA rather than in the coding
parts for protein.
And everything since then has supported
that, including things like, you want
to turn an ancestor of a human and a chimp
into something that will look a whole lot
different from a chimp, turn into us,
change stuff with regulation, transcription
factors, promoters.
What you see with that is this is endlessly
networks for amplifying effects for macro changes.
And there's a new person in the department, Bio department,
Hunter Frazier, a new assistant professor,
who works in this area showing just how
much evolutionary change is being driven
by change in regulatory parts of the DNA world,
rather than the genes itself.
Changing a little bit about how this protein works, that's OK.
Changing if/then clauses for entire networks,
that's hugely important.
Another interesting factoid-- there's
now been the genomes of, I don't know,
about 100 different species sequenced, and ranging
from really short genomes with I don't
know how many genes in there, to the longest ones.
When you pile them up and you look at them
as a function of how long their genomes are,
the more genes you find in a species, the greater
the percentage of those genes are
that are transcription factors.
And this makes wonderful sense as well.
You got one gene and you only need one transcription factor.
You got two genes and you could milk maximal information out
of them with three transcription factors.
You transcribe A or B, or AB.
You've got three genes and there's seven.
And the equation is 2 to the nth.
This one.
Whatever.
But what you see is by four genes, you're up to 15.
By five genes, you're up to 30-- you're
having an exponential, a dramatic increase in the number
of transcription factors you need to take advantage
of all the possible combinations of networks of gene expression.
The larger the number of genes you find in an organism,
the greater the percentage it is of transcription factors.
In other words, get tiny little micro, micro changes
in DNA coding for transcription factor splicing, enzymes,
promoters, and you're going to have big major consequences.
So over and over here, we see this contrast microevolution is
about the function of proteins.
Macroevolution is about which proteins--
when networks' if/then clauses are far more consequential.
One additional domain of-- we're not
talking about a tiny little micro change
in one base pair-- one additional domain,
a highly revolutionary one that came some years ago that also
has lots of implications for thinking
about macro stuff in evolution.
And this revolved around one of the great irresistible musical
dramas that have ever come out of the history of science.
Once that is-- there's got to be a musical somewhere
in the future of this-- having to do with a scientist named
Barbara McClintock.
Barbara McClintock-- if you are sort
of a modern molecular sort of person, at some point or other,
you will have to have sacrificed a goat at the altar of Barbara
McClintock.
She is so amazing and she has such a stirring story
as to what happened with her, one which actually is so.
Barbara McClintock was born, I don't know, about 1900 or so,
and was a plant geneticist and was sort of
off doing genetics of plants and doing something or other
with maize.
Whatever those people do.
And she was extremely successful.
She was wildly successful.
I think at age 40 or so in the late 1930s,
she was already a member of what's
called the National Academy of Sciences, which
is like the most honorific science club you can belong to
in this country.
40-year-old women in 1940 were not
becoming members of the National Academy of Sciences.
110-year-old white guys with shiny foreheads
were becoming members of the National Academy.
For her to have been elected at that point,
she was an amazing scientist, one of the absolute leaders
in the field.
So she's cruising along there, being renowned.
And one day she made a discovery that completely
destroyed her career.
So she's sitting there one day and she studies beloved corn
maize and the patterns of inheritance
based on colors of kernels.
Genes, molecular biology, like nonexistent.
None of the stuff available now.
All you could do in terms of making sense
of what is being inherited, patterns of inheritance,
is just looking at the phenotype,
looking at the appearance.
Peas and whether they're wrinkly or not, people
and whether they're wrinkly or not, corn
and what the colors are of the various kernels there.
That was cutting edge molecular sort of genetics at the time.
So she's working in that domain and she's seeing a result.
She's seeing a pattern of inheritance
which keeps popping up in certain circumstances.
And you go through all of the inferential math that
was available and you crunch through everything.
And you, if you were Barbara McClintock pursuing this,
you come up with a conclusion that is totally nutty.
The only way to explain how this change was occurring
was if genes were picking up and moving around on the DNA,
if gene were jumping around, if genes were mobile,
moving around.
And out of this, she came up with a proposal
that there are such things as transposable genes,
transposable genetic elements, transposons.
All of the people who spent decades afterward mocking her
in various ridiculing tones of voices
soon referred to these as jumping genes.
And the general consensus in the field
was that Barbara McClintock had gone out of her mind.
Yeah, genes jumping around.
Yeah, right.
I'll sell you the Brooklyn Bridge
after that if you believe it.
That's ridiculous.
That's ridiculous.
And Barbara McClintock, having a certain stoic self-esteem
sort of based personality of one that was-- basically said,
you know what?
This is what I see.
You want to believe it, believe it.
You don't want to believe it, don't believe it.
Leave me alone, I want to go back to my experiments.
And she essentially disappeared from the field
and just sat out in her cornfield
at a lab in Long Island called Cold Spring Harbor lab,
and just chugged along on her own for decades afterward.
She wrote papers about it that were incomprehensible
to people, because no one could believe
anything this ridiculous.
And she was developing this whole story
about genes that move, transposable genetic elements.
Everybody ignored her.
She was mocked.
She was pilloried.
She was burned at the stake.
All of that.
And then finally somewhere in the 1980s, molecular techniques
caught up enough to show she was absolutely right.
And these things now are called transposons.
Transposable genetic elements.
Genes really do pick up and move around.
And this was an amazing landmark discovery.
The entire world went crazy about Barbara McClintock
at the time.
She was on the cover of Post's Wheaties boxes of cereal.
[LAUGHTER]
There were Barbara McClintock lines
of dance clothes and exercise videos and recipe books
and all of that.
And somewhere along the way, they gave her her Nobel Prize.
And she was in her late 80s at the time.
And showing exactly the stuff she was made out of,
she said, well, that's nice.
Thanks for the Nobel Prize.
But you know what?
I didn't really need to have gotten it.
This is what I saw.
You want to believe it, yes or no?
You believe it now?
That's nice.
Leave me alone.
Let me go back to work.
[LAUGHTER]
And she continued to work in her cornfields doing experiments
up until about a week before her death in the early '90s.
This is a totally cool, amazing figure
in the history of science, a lonely pioneer.
As it turned out, she wasn't that lonely of a pioneer
and people didn't think she was quite that crazy.
And apparently a lot of her papers
were ignored because she could not write
and her papers were incomprehensible.
But nonetheless, the general picture
was, she discovered all of this on her own,
staked her career on this, and most people
thought she was out of her mind and eventually vindicated.
Totally cool sort of piece of the history of science.
Really, really inspirational person.
And I met her once and got to see her
with her corn and she was--
[LAUGHTER]
A remarkable-- she was like 90 at the time-- and a remarkably
nice, low-key person, where after about 13 and a half
seconds, it was obvious that what she mostly wanted
was for me to get the hell out of there
so she could go back to her corn, which
was her response to everybody there.
But very heroic figure.
So she discovers this entire new world
of these transposable genetic elements.
And people have been studying it since, these jumping genes.
The first thing that has become clear
as the field ha matured is she picked the right species
to study.
She never would have discovered transposable genetic elements
if she was out there alone in her cornfield
studying sperm whales or something.
Separate of the funding problems and the logistics,
she would not have found it.
She did it in the right organisms, which were plants.
Think about it.
You are an animal.
And one of the things you can do is, when the going gets tough,
you can get up and run away, or you can crawl away or fly away
or whatever sort of animate animal type things can do.
If you're a plant, you're stuck there.
You can't run away.
And if you're going to survive a challenge,
you're going to have to have something
more subtle going for you than, oh, let's run
and get out of here.
And it turns out all sorts of realms of plant stress
responses are in just the avant garde of molecular biology.
Plants have to have fancier tricks
than all sorts of boring animals because plants don't run away.
What they do instead, among their various defenses, when
a challenge, a pathogen, a climate change, whatever it is
comes along, one of the things they do
is there's realms of their DNA where they move genes around,
where they shuffle stuff around in the hopes of stumbling
onto something novel and useful to get them out of that mess.
Plants have induce-able events of genes moving
transposable genetic elements.
They tend to induce them when the plant is
under some sort of challenge, a cellular stress response.
And the way that's done is by activating
an enzyme called transposase.
And those of you who are new to the business, enzymes
tend to have -ase the end of the word--
lactase, sucrase, transposase.
And what you've got there is, this
is a defense on the part of the plant.
Juggle some of its DNA prudently,
and see if you can come up with something to help you.
Make a copy of the gene, and then
go plunk it down somewhere else and see if you've
stumbled into something useful.
And it was only in the aftermath that people
started to look at the same issue in animals
and vertebrates and mammals.
And shockingly to everyone, except the people
who hung out with her, was the fact that we've got them, too.
We've got transposable genetic elements, we animals.
We've got them.
Where they were first discovered made a lot of sense as well.
You are some scientists and you've just
invented in your lab some pathogen, some toxin,
some who knows what, that has never been seen before
in the history of the planet.
You've synthesized it and you inject it
in a whole bunch of people.
And they get totally sick and miserable.
And then you come back two weeks later, two months later,
and they will have made antibodies against that thing.
Their body, their immune systems,
will have made antibodies against some invasive pathogen
thingee that never existed before
in the history of the planet.
And a staggering challenge is how does the immune system
come up with this vast variability
for dealing with novel pathogens,
making antibodies that will recognize them?
And people soon discovered one of the tricks
was splicing of genes relevant to making
antibodies and juggling them around-- induce-able,
transposable events-- in the hope of making
a gazillion new types of antibodies
in a remarkable filtering process that goes on
in the immune system, spotting are any of them
good against this new thing that just showed up?
That's where you had a lot of transposable events
in the vertebrate immune system in response to novel pathogens.
Turns out, we weren't the only ones
doing that because there were other things that
could be happening.
There were all sorts of the pathogens that
could do the same exact thing.
There is one tropical parasite, Trypanosome, which
is one you do not want to get.
And trypanosomiasis is the inflammatory disease
you get from a trypanosome, this parasite,
and it shows up in your body, and your body
does this induce-able trick and, thank god,
comes up with some antibodies that could begin
to target it and attack it.
But trypanosomes also worship at the altar
of Barbara McClintock.
What they do is, a couple of weeks into it,
they take away the surface proteins on their surface
and they juggle some of the relevant DNA
and come up with a novel version of it.
So just as you've got the antibodies online,
you can't recognize the thing with those antibodies.
You've got to start the process all over again.
And thus trypanosomes are always a couple steps ahead,
thus the immune system has to have
evolved better ways of juggling, coming up with novel stuff.
Co-evolutionary races there.
But the cornerstone of it is inducing
movable genetic elements.
And what people have learned since then
is it occurs outside of just the immune system
and under interesting circumstances.
One really amazing one, which I was going to tell you later
but I will tell you now because I just can't wait-- there
is one transposable element that's
very predominant in primates.
And there is a certain cell type and a certain time of life
when it is most mobile, when it moves around the most-- which
is, the cells in your brain that are going to be making
new neurons, neural progenitor cells, at the time
that they start proliferating and making new neurons.
There is an induce-able event at that time
where you increase the movement of that one genetic element.
What are you doing?
You're making some new neurons.
And, as it turns out, in a fairly controlled realm
of your DNA, you decide to shuffle the deck a little bit
just because you want to get the interesting novel sort
of things that neurons can do.
This is totally amazing.
This is totally amazing because, among other things, what
this tells you is the cells in your body
that have the greatest thing to do with making you who you are,
are the least constrained by genetic determinism.
Because right when these types of cells, neurons,
are first being generated, they're
doing more shuffling of genetic cards
than any other cell type in the body.
That sure takes away the power of genes a lot
when it comes to the nervous system.
These transposable events make a whole lot of variability,
some of which is wonderful.
Some of which is not, and this is coming back
to the question that was asked before, are these disastrous?
In most of the cases, yes.
But in a few minutes, we'll see exactly why it is not likely
that when you randomly shuffle a bunch of cards,
they're going to come out in a perfect sequence of numbers
or some such thing.
It is a long shot to get something interesting out
of it.
Nonetheless, this is a mechanism for doing this.
What this allows you to do by moving parts of DNA
around, making a copy of this stretch and then moving it
and, I think-- I don't know the field that well,
but I think, at least in most cases,
the notion is it plunks down randomly somewhere else
in the genome.
By moving stuff around, you can have big macro consequences.
For example, suppose you've got, by now,
and if/then clause introducing this concept
already-- if/then clause, and we can translate
this totally primitively into worlds of promoters
and worlds of the actual gene.
So you've got an if/then clause.
Suppose you are dehydrated.
If you were dehydrated, translating that
into actual biology, I don't know, your hematocrit
or how wrinkly your kidneys are getting or some such thing.
Then tell your kidneys to start doing something or other
that kidneys do to retain water, which I once understood
for a finale, no longer do.
But you wake them up and they have some response.
So we've got an if/then clause.
If you were getting dehydrated, then make your kidneys work
in a way that increases water retention.
This is ridiculous.
There is if you are getting dehydrated promoter.
There is no gene that is equivalent.
There's networks, though.
There's networks, and there's ways
in which your kidney monitors that and other outposts
in your body.
So we have a rough if/then clause.
Wouldn't take a whole lot of imagination
to turn that into real biology.
Now suppose you have some transposable events.
Suppose whatever it is, the promoter world of that,
picks up and moves and the if you
were dehydrated part of the if/then clause floats around.
It gets plunked down upstream from the genes
that say go and ovulate.
What have you just invented?
What does this allow you to do?
So now you've got an if/then clause, a promoter
of that response to dehydration, and it turns
on genes related to ovulation.
What does that get for you?
Any ideas?
Oh, come on.
Ovulate really frequently.
Ovulate--
Really frequently.
Really frequently.
Depends on your threshold.
If like you should be-- skip orange juice in the morning,
does that mean you're dehydrated enough to ovulate.
You could set it at a very low threshold like that.
You could do that.
You could do something else though.
What else?
[INAUDIBLE]
You're about to die of dehydration
and that gives you one last chance
for a round of passing on copies of your genes,
if you could find some guy who isn't dehydrated
to dramatic blood flow extent.
That's a possibility.
What else can you do?
Seasonal mating.
Yes, seasonal mating.
That's what it's mostly used for.
Certainly possibilities here.
But what this allows you-- you're
a species where six months of the year it's dry
and six months of the year it's wonderful wet and lush
and exactly the time you want to be having a baby.
And you've got like a six month gestational period.
What do you want?
You want your body to know when it's the dry season,
and that's the signal to mate, because you want to give birth
during the rainy season.
And then there's species where you are pregnant for two weeks
or so.
And what you want to have there as a rule is,
oh my god, if it's the dry season, don't ovulate,
because I'm going to give birth to kids who are going
to starve or some such thing.
Let's wait until I get a signal that I'm
totally wet and hydrated.
Then ovulate.
You introduce novel if/then clauses.
And for certain species, this would
be how you would do seasonal mating-- how
to know you should obviously at a time of year
where, given your gestation length,
it's going to set you up for giving birth
at the time of year when your offspring are
most likely to survive.
And thus, you will have passed on copies of your genes.
All of that.
So that's great.
Another example.
And this one is immediately accessible
and is a first crude way of beginning
to approach some of this stuff that just flowed seamlessly
and cheaply in the forms of theories
from last week's stuff.
So you have some if/then element in there
and a promoter which, in some way,
can tell this individual near me smells like me.
And we will see, by next week, exactly how
that translates into genetics.
But this individual kind of smells a lot like me.
And it has an if/then clause which immediately shuts down
transcription of all sorts of things related to fertility.
You don't mate with relatives.
Some sort of incest taboo runs through a gazillion species
out there.
Individuals smelling like you, if you were a hamster,
make you much less likely to mate with them.
So a very logical if/then clause.
All that works great.
And now you've had a transposable genetic event.
And you plunk down the, if it smells like me then,
into upstream of the gene that says cooperate.
And what have we just invented?
The starts of kin selection.
And you could see all sorts of rules like,
if you have more promoters, you could
begin to have subtleties of saying, if they really,
really smell a lot like me, like if all these promoters are
going off at once, then really, really, really cooperate.
If they smell only somewhat like me, only somewhat cooperate.
You could begin to fine tune that.
What have you just invented?
A way of taking sensory information
about degree of related-ness and turning that
into your extent of sacrificing for one sibling or eight
cousins.
So you could begin to see how you invent new if/then clauses.
Obviously this is ridiculous.
Obviously this bears no relationship
to what's going on in the real world.
This would be happening in nose cells.
This is occurring down in the ovaries.
There is no promoter that responds to, oh, somebody
here is smelling like me.
But there are some that do stuff not all that far from that.
You could begin to imagine turning this
into real biology, how you could program for this.
And once you've got genes moving around,
you've plunked a promoter down someplace else.
You've just made a new if/then clause.
Now the possibilities is of transposing genetic elements,
also raises the possibility of moving around
parts of genes-- not just parts of regulatory elements--
moving around parts of genes.
How would you do that?
How would you move a part of a gene?
Exons.
That's that modular construction of genes
again, where if you get a transposase
that comes and does its thing there,
and in making a copy of this, moves this stretch around,
you're now moving copies of parts of genes around.
And you can relate new genes.
For example, here we have the basic mechanism
of action of steroid hormones.
You guys who need an introduction to that,
we'll get it in a week or two.
Steroid hormones-- hormones like estrogen,
progesterone, testosterone, glucocorticoids.
All of these, they work as follows.
Steroid hormones can enter a target cell
and they bind to their receptor.
Yes, indeed.
Lock and key.
All that happens.
Steroid hormones are not made of amino acids.
They have a different structure.
But nonetheless, each has a distinctive shape.
And each type of receptor for a type of steroid hormone
has a distinctive shape driven by its amino acid sequence
and those gene codes.
All of that.
So you've got a specific type of steroid hormone fitting
into its specific type of receptor-- estrogen
into an estrogen receptor, that sort of thing.
And what it does as a result is it
activates this receptor complex.
And on the other side of it, is a confirmation
which recognizes a particular promoter down on the DNA.
A, in this case, what would be called an estrogen responsive
promoter.
So what have you got there?
You've got events going on in the outside world.
You are reading the right parts of some novel
and suddenly you're secreting certain hormones
that weren't there before.
And you're changing genomic effects shortly afterward.
This is environment regulating genes like crazy.
What is this requiring?
One part of the receptor recognizing the hormone,
specifically.
And one part of the receptor recognizing
its specific appropriate promoter.
So now along comes one of those transposable events.
And it happens, steroid hormones--
this would be called the hormone binding domain.
And this would be called the DNA binding domain.
In steroid receptor genes, those are in different exons.
And suppose along comes a transposable event.
And you clip this part off and you stick it
in a different hormone binding domain.
So you've just made a completely different if/then clause.
If this hormone is around, then do this.
Now suddenly instead it's, if this hormone is around,
then do this.
New if/then clause.
Here would be one possibility.
One of the class of steroid hormones,
glucocorticoids, which eventually you
will come to love because you will hear endlessly about it.
And glucocorticoids, they're stress hormones.
Human version of hydrocortisone.
For our purposes right now, what's
interesting about them is they suppress the immune system.
These are steroidal anti-inflammatories.
When you're taking non-steroidals,
you're taking things that work like glucocorticoids
on the immune system, but they don't
have some of the side effects.
Glucocorticoids suppress the immune system.
It is very well understood.
And glucocorticoids come in and bind
to the hormone binding domain of the glucocorticoid receptor.
And this translocates to a glucocorticoid responsive
promoter.
That's its whole thing.
So now you have gotten a transposable event.
And what you've done instead is plunked down
the hormone binding domain from the progesterone receptor.
So suddenly you've got an if/then clause
that's novel, instead of, if they are glucocorticoids
around, suppress immunity.
Now instead you've got, if there's progesterone
around, suppress immunity.
What do you think you've just invented?
Any uses for that?
If you happen to know what progesterone is about and where
that might have been a great invention to come up with.
Any speculation?
During pregnancy?
During pregnancy.
Progesterone, which is progestational--
so you suppress your immune system during pregnancy.
How come?
Why is that a clever thing to do?
So your body doesn't eat your baby.
[LAUGHTER]
Did you just say so your body doesn't eat your baby?
[LAUGHTER]
Well, there you go.
I don't know what your family is like, but I won't speculate.
[LAUGHTER]
But, yeah.
You do that so your body won't eat your baby.
So your body doesn't do that, so that you don't have
an immune reaction against it.
And that's a whole world of having to decide this thing
belongs here, instead of this thing
having invaded my placenta-- back
to that word that was used by gynecologists talking
about last week-- the imprinted genes.
Male derived imprinted genes making for a more potent
invasion into the placenta.
All of that.
Yeah.
This is a great way to now do that deal of,
you suppress immunity during pregnancy,
you are less likely to have some weird immune attack
on your fetus.
And that was a great invention.
That was a wonderful thing to have come up with.
There's an interesting consequence of that,
though, one that pops up in medicine
often, which is-- so you are immune
suppressed because you're pregnant
and then you give birth, and you stop being immune suppressed.
The progesterone disappears for the most part.
You're off into a very different endocrine world at that point.
Your immune system comes back to where it was before hand.
But there is a potential problem,
which is your immune system is so wiped out
and you're so distracted changing diapers and having
no sleep whatsoever, and so your immune system is
a little bit out of control.
What if it recovers from this pregnancy immune suppression
and, instead of coming back to where it was before,
it overshoots a little bit?
What have you gotten at that point?
Your immune system shoots into being more active than it
should be at that point.
What class of diseases are you set up for now?
Autoimmune.
Autoimmune disease.
Whoa, that's as good as the lock and key,
everybody knowing that one.
You are set up for an autoimmune disease then.
There is a whole realm of autoimmune diseases
that tend to have either initial onset
or flare up in the post parturition period for women.
And in fact, there are some autoimmune diseases,
a very serious form, say, of lupus,
women really should not get pregnant,
because they are going to get such a burst of lupus flare ups
afterward.
So this is a clever thing during pregnancy, as usual.
You don't want to overdo it.
Our main point here though is, by doing
some transposable event, moving one exon around
and sticking it to another exon that never
existed before, you've made up a completely novel if/then
clause.
So where have we gotten so far?
We are worlds away from the dull, gradualist world
of micromutational stuff from the other day of one protein
working differently.
You have the capacity to invent completely novel proteins
through splicing enzyme changes, through transposable events.
You have the opportunity to make completely novel networks
with mutations and promoters, with mutations
and transcription factors.
What all of this means is, there is going to be major changes.
And thus, after a five minute break,
we will come back to your question
there of, what are the odds of these changes actually
being good for you?
So a five minute break.
Sometimes you will find a gene will be duplicated.
There will be an extra copy of the gene.
There will be two copies, one after the other.
Gene duplication.
Sometimes, you can have even a larger expansion of the number
of copies of a gene.
Or you can have duplication of a whole stretch of genes.
And this is falling into this new area
that people refer to, calling it copy number variant.
And ranging from one extra copy of one gene
to massive duplication of whole stretches of chromosomes.
And no surprise, you wind up getting
interestingly different things going on at that point.
What we'll see later on in the course is,
there is more and more evidence that the disease schizophrenia
involves mutations in copy number variance.
And here, this is not a mutation in one base pair.
This is not a mutation in one transcription.
This is extra copies of genes sitting there.
This can have some very interesting implications.
In some cases, the second gene can function as a backup.
If something goes wrong in the first one,
there's a second one there doing its job.
And there is some suggestion that something like that
is occurring in some subsets of Alzheimer's disease.
Or what you can have is the number of copies of the gene
you make has something to do with how much of the protein
you make.
And there's recent studies showing
that when you compare Japanese populations
with Western European ones, on the average,
Japanese populations have more copies of a gene that
has multiple copies, more copies of a gene that
makes an enzyme related to carbohydrate digestion.
I have no idea what the implications would be of that.
But this is not a populational difference in a DNA sequence
or in a-- this is simply the number of copies of the gene.
What a second copy, what a duplication also
allows you to do in the most metaphorical sense
is experiment with one of the copies.
Because the other one is there taking
care of whatever the function is that's critical,
what you'll see is you get faster evolution going on
with genes that you have duplicated, where one of them
is the one that, in a sense, is freed
to have more dramatic movement.
And what you then see is it's more
likely to stumble into some great use
without sacrificing the initial use in the process.
And there's a guy at the University
of Oregon named Joe Thornton who's
done really interesting work on the evolution of genes
for steroid receptors.
And what he has shown from ancestral genes
is that's exactly what's occurred.
A lot of what are now two different genes for two
different types of steroids receptors
were once duplicates of the same gene.
And one was allowed to float and eventually,
in at least some cases, stumbled into something useful,
while the other one held into place.
In passing, what that phenomenon does
is help explain one of the endless, frustrating,
exasperating, irritating things that people
who attack the notion of evolution bring up,
which is the famed sound bite that they have of the problem
irreducible complexity.
It always runs the same way, which
is saying that evolution can't possibly
exist because is what good is half of an eye?
You've got to have those intermediate forms.
And what good is it-- you couldn't have invented.
Evolution could not have produced an eye
in one mutation, one generation, and thus it
would have to be in a series of steps.
And what good are the series of steps?
They can't exist.
There can't be anything such as evolution.
Off you go.
Hallelujah.
So what you get here in these cases
is a demonstration, instead, by having
extra copies of genes, one of which is freed to be evolving.
You don't have to have a rapid transition from one
to the other.
You can have this thing moving along, stumbling along,
until it just happens to come up with a shape of a receptor that
just happens to be able to bind a hormone that stumbled
its own way into existence 10,000 generations earlier,
which because it was duplicated, it didn't matter that one
copy was now of a form where there was no receptor on earth
for it until it happened to stumble into that.
And there is more and more evidence
that duplicated genes have a way of describing
these intermediate states where you don't necessarily
have half an eye, but instead you
have the pieces ready in place there
for when one thing suddenly pops up,
which completes the picture.
In fact, you can have, as it turns out, sort of half.
Russ Fernald in the biology department
has done really cool research on the evolution of eyes.
And you should read about it some time
to read basically how eyes evolved
from a single layer of cells on the surface
of some ancient proto something.
And you sure can have half an eye
and a zillion intermediate forms.
None the less, this business of multiple copies
allowing you the freedom to have loser evolving of single genes
of a time-- critical mechanism.
So now we've got all of our pieces in place-- changes
in splicing enzymes and promoters and transcription
factors and transportable elements and number
of copies of genes, number of copies
of whole stretches of genes.
What wind up being the consequences of this?
Back to the question brought up before.
So what we saw the other day is some time futz around with one
single base pair, one single gene,
and you've got somebody who's going to be
dead at three months of age.
PKU, phenylketonuria.
One single gene could be a total, utter disaster.
My god.
Instead now, thanks to these macro evolutionary changes,
you change one single base pair and as a result
you change-- one, two, three-- seven different genes.
No, not seven.
But you change more than one gene,
you have one single base pair change,
and if it's an exon that's used in a lot
of different combinatorial ways, you've
now produced mutated versions of a whole bunch
of different proteins.
One single change in the transcription factor and you've
invented an entirely new network of expression.
What are the odds of stumbling into something there
that is going to suddenly be great and wonderful in all
those different areas of consequence?
It's really unlikely.
What have we just seen here?
This is a very stabilizing mechanism for equilibrium.
Equilibrium, long periods of stasis.
What we've got is, if a single base pair
change is going to affect half a dozen different proteins
or affect, through a transcription factor,
entire networks, the odds are pretty lousy that you are just
going to happen to stumble into one that
works in all those domains, or at least
works in enough of them that it doesn't do you in in others.
Most of these macro mutational changes
are going to be bad news.
Most of the time, in other words,
there is stabilizing selection against
macro mutational changes.
So what have we just gotten?
We've just gotten a straight line.
We've just gotten long periods of stasis.
So when do the changes come?
When you have some circumstance that is extreme enough
that it doesn't matter that if this mutation--
you have made elevendy new types of proteins.
And elevendy minus one of them are not great news.
And the final one used to kill you.
If the final one now is the trait that
is going to save you, it is going
to carry the weight of all the other proteins that
are changed.
If you get what is called an evolutionary bottleneck,
if you get a circumstance of such severe selection for such
a tiny subset of traits, that basically the rule is
it doesn't matter-- if you have that trait-- it doesn't matter
how much of a network you've changed,
you're going to be one of the ones who come through
and everybody else does not.
And the evolutionary record is full of all sorts
of circumstances where there have been selective bottlenecks
where 1% of a population comes out the other end of it because
of some rare trait that they had which carries all the macro
consequences of that.
For example, there was clearly some sort
of bottleneck of selection that went on with cheetahs about--
I don't know, a couple thousand years ago or so.
People have estimated more accurately.
Because all the cheetahs are so genetically
similar to each other that you can transplant tissue,
you can graft tissue from any cheetah on earth
onto another one and there will not be rejection.
All of the cheetah on earth are closely related descendants
of what had to have been fairly recently, a couple of thousand,
a tidy, remnant population that now is highly inbred
and you had some sort of selective bottleneck
that went on at that time.
Similarly, I can't remember when in hominid history,
but the suggestion was at at least a couple of points
in hominid evolution, there have been
points of selective bottlenecks where glaciers or comets
or knows what, where only a small subset of individuals
with some traits that have been, up until then, neutral
or are unlikely to be useful because of these big macro
consequences, suddenly only the folks who had it
came out the other end.
What are we beginning to describe here?
Circumstances of rapid change.
Circumstances of punctuated radical change.
There are circumstances that begin
to make conceivable punctuated equilibrium.
It's so intrinsic in this huge complexity
of macroevolutionary change in DNA because of the structure
intrinsic in it are two critical things.
One is the vast majority of the time,
make a change which changes some whole network
and it's going, to be a disaster.
The majority of the time, there's going to be stasis.
And also intrinsic in that is the ability
to have massive macro changes, any of these examples
we've had here, where, in periods
of selective bottlenecks, you're going to get something
like that happening.
So Gould and friends are absolutely right.
All of that.
Not necessarily.
Because again, this radical rapid change period, that's
for paleontologists, for biologists.
That's thousands of generations, in some cases.
Again, what counts as very rapid in one
scientific discipline may not be the same for the biologist
at the other end.
Nonetheless, this winds up being a mechanism
for long periods of spaces and very rapid change.
So that suggests that, where we have these mechanisms.
So how does one begin to resolve the microevolutionary picture
of gradualist social biology from last week
and the macro picture of punctuated equilibrium
drama, all of that?
How do you begin to put the pieces together?
A number of ways that it could be done.
Let me just see here.
Yes.
A number of ways it could be done.
One is thinking again about micro mutational changes
or about changes in the function of preexisting proteins.
And macro mutational changes are about the invention
of new proteins, new networks, new, if/then clauses,
all of that serving different functions.
Back to the difference in the genome
between humans and chimps.
When you look at the micro versus the macro differences,
for example, in the domain of the immune system,
most of the differences between humans and chimps
genetically have to do with microevolutionary differences.
And that comes down to clinical pictures
that you see humans are much more resistant to tuberculosis
than chimps are.
Chimps are much more resistant to malaria than humans are.
Nonetheless, it's the basic nuts and bolts of the immune system
there.
One of these guys has a little bit better of this,
one has worse of that.
This is within a realm of gradualist change.
The genetic differences that explain that
are microevolutionary ones.
Where are the macro evolutionary differences between humans
and chimp genomes?
Those are the ones that have to do with development.
And those are the ones that amplify differences big time.
You have one tiny little difference and you
get an organism that's going to look as different from a chimp
as a human does.
The other way around, some systems, their evolution
is much more built driven by micro changes, some much more
than macro.
Some of the most interesting macro stuff
is going to be developmental blueprints,
developmental trajectories.
What else?
What else in terms of resolution?
There are plenty of fossil histories
by now for some line that are complete enough that it is
very clear they look like this.
And the majority of fossil pedigrees
that are that detailed enough support a punctuated model.
Nonetheless, there are plenty that
are understood with as many time points in here that
follow gradualist models.
So evidence for both.
Nonetheless mostly punctuated evidence.
The biggest problem though in debating all of this
is it is impossible for the most part
to see gradualism going on, because it's gradual,
because it's hard to spot that.
It's hard to show whether changes are incremental
or changes are rapid.
But by now, there are a few examples
where people have actually been able to observe
evolutionary changes in organisms and ones
that can count as fairly rapid.
One first example-- for reasons I cannot begin to understand,
people in Chicago-- I don't know if it's in the Chicago Field
Museum or the mayor's office or something--
have all sorts of carcasses around from rats killed
in Chicago in the 1880s.
Key to the city, souvenirs, who knows what?
Chicago's centennial.
But those around stored someplace.
And a few years ago, researchers were
able to look at the genomes of those beasts
compared to rats that are being taken
these days off the streets of Chicago, current ones,
and showing over the course of a century, a lot of the genome
has evolved.
There are a lot of differences.
Over the course of a century-- I don't know, what is that?
Maybe 500, 1,000 generations or so.
There has been significant change over that time.
Darwin's finches, for those of you
Darwin history fans, that started the whole thing.
All sorts of different species.
The finches found in the Galapagos Islands
and people have been studying them
for half a century, three-quarters of a century.
Gene distributions are changing-- gene distributions
for traits, like the size of your bill
and thus what kind of food you could break into,
in response to environmental shifting there.
That is being documented.
That's going on.
What else?
Another one that is really interesting
and important and critical for lots
of us, which is the evolution of resistance to diabetes.
This is a very interesting phenomenon.
Diabetes comes in two forms.
Juvenile onset diabetes-- that's the one where you need insulin.
The diabetes that's instead becoming an epidemic
is adult onset diabetes, which is
when you have a body which is all built out
of lean hominid history to store away lots of calories
and all of that, and you throw in a westernized diet
and you get the increasing westernized problem of obesity.
And you then wind up getting diabetes.
For our purposes right now, it doesn't matter
what diabetes looks like.
The main thing is, it is driven by food
excesses in westernized diets.
So there's been a whole literature
by now of people studying populations
that have had rapid shifts from traditional diets
to westernized diets.
A lot of Pacific Islanders have been studied.
All sorts of other populations.
The group that is the iconic one to study
is Native American group in Arizona
called the Pima Indians.
And what's very convenient about them is about half
of them live in the United States and about half
in Mexico.
And there has been very rapid changes in diet
in the American side, less so in the Mexican one-- far more
traditional.
And one of the things that soon emerged
once westernized sort of typical processed food
became the predominant food eaten by people in the Arizona
side is 90% diabetes rates by the time you're 30 years old.
The exact same thing in some of the Pacific Islands
that have been studied, in the Naru and Samoa
and some of these other places.
Astronomically high rates of diabetes.
Another population where it's been studied
are populations of Jews who were living in Yemen
and who-- I think in the '60s or '70s--
moved to Israel, switching from a very traditional diet
to a very westernized one.
Diabetes rates absolutely through the roof.
What that's doing very quickly was killing off
all sorts of folks very early in their reproductive life history
periods.
Suddenly you've got the people who
are most vulnerable to diabetes when suddenly given
a westernized diet, they're leaving
fewer copies of their genes.
And it's been in the last decade or so,
some of the Pacific island populations
that have been studied, the diabetes rates
are beginning to go down.
In other words, there has been this selection that
went into Western European populations,
I don't know, a century or so, which
is the folks who have the most efficient metabolisms
and can store away all of those dozens of Hershey bars
effortlessly.
They're dead.
And they died before they left copies of their genes.
You are now selecting for human populations
that have sloppier metabolisms.
And this is within the course of a century.
Another example.
Here's a totally, totally cool, irresistible one.
This is one of the great genetics stories.
As you can see, or not, this pure white screen
tells you that this is research that went on in Siberia.
[LAUGHTER]
Actually, these were Siberian-- so this was a famous study done
by this Soviet geneticists starting,
I don't know, about 50 years or so,
where you have these Siberian silver foxes.
And that's what they look like.
And for all sorts of reasons, who knows what,
it is highly valued to have clothing made
out of their bodies, and thus highly valuable wild animals,
tough to get.
And this guy decided, well, what we need to do
is start some Siberian silver fox domestication farming
stuff.
So he did a very logical thing.
He started selectively breeding them for tameness.
He would have a bunch of captive foxes that were wild born
and most of them totally feral and crazed.
And he would see, is there a subset, 5%, 10% of them,
that I could get relatively closer to that were calmer
in the human's proximity?
Only let those ones breed.
Now take their offspring and only take the 10% or so
that are most calm, most easily tamed.
And it took about 35 generations or so to get foxes
that were as tame as dogs are.
Something else totally amazing.
So he's breeding them for only one trait-- a behavioral trait,
which is the ability to get close to them
if you're a human, calmness on their part,
whatever you might describe it as.
Breeding entirely based on that trait.
And when you spend 35 generations breeding
a wild animal like a fox so that it's
the ones who are most able to function
in the role of domesticated animals,
it's not just the behavior that changes.
This is what the adults look like 35 generations later.
Aw!
[LAUGHTER]
Oh, give me one.
Give me 100.
I want-- yes.
They're adorable.
Can you believe how great they look?
What's going on here?
They were selecting for a behavioral trait,
and they are fox puppies.
They've got a big roundy ears and these cute
little short muzzle things.
And they wag their tails when humans show up.
And these are not dog descent into wolves.
This was 35 generations to turn something on to left
into something looking at the right.
Very interesting thing we will come to in the ethology
lectures.
Basically, what you're breeding for when you're
breeding a wild animal to be tame-able,
your breeding for the ones that behave
more childishly, the ones who are acting more
like developing animals who are more
dependent on other individuals.
You're breeding them for infantile traits.
This is what a baby fox looks like.
This is what these domesticated foxes look like.
Totally amazing that this happened.
Ironic ending department-- you will
notice that the coat has changed from the ones on the left
to these wonderful coats that you just
want to have made into underwear and hats and all
of that sort of thing.
And on the right, they look like Spot and Rover
and all those guys.
It is called a piebald coloration pattern.
Somehow also, you can't get the domestication
without that happening.
Ironic ending-- nobody wants to wear
clothes that look like that.
They would've been killing Dalmatians for years
if that were desirable.
In the process of breeding them, they
became useless economically.
Nonetheless, totally amazing demonstration.
35 generations and you turn something
on to left into something looking
like that on the right, who will wag its tail like you would
lick your face and bring your chewed up slippers back to you.
This is a very rapid change.
Final example.
This is one that is also quite consequential,
and one possibly even more so than diabetes,
which is if this type of evolution
keeps occurring at the rate that it's happening, all of us
are going to have dramatically shortened life
expectancies-- antibiotic resistance in various bacteria.
Evolution going on there.
What we see in all sorts of cases is,
evolution is not just occurring over the course
of glacial lengths of time.
It can be occurring very rapidly.
And what we see here also is, in some cases,
it's going to leave a different sort of skeleton,
changing how good your kidneys and pancreases are dealing
with westernized food, that's not going
to make for a different fossil.
Breeding for antibiotic resistance in bacteria
is not going to make for a different-- actually,
can bacteria even make fossils?
Does anybody know?
Yes.
Yes.
So it's going to make bacterial fossils that look exactly--
all of this interesting amazing stuff going on,
and it's stuff that no punctuated radical dogmatic
paleontology type would ever be able to pick up.
So what are we heading to here?
We're heading to a wonderful heart-warming resolution
of these different schools of thought, which
is, can't we all get along?
And can't we all have means of having
different types of evolution happening?
So almost certainly harking back to what mentioned before,
microevolutionary changes-- the immune system
in chimps versus humans.
Macroevolutionary changes development.
You don't have to choose vanilla or chocolate.
They could be going on at the same time.
And they could be going on at the same time
in a very important resolving way, which
is-- so you've got evidence for a punctuated change
of some trait.
And single traits don't evolve at a time.
They come in whole packages, packages
making you wag your tail and such.
So there is some other punctuated thing going on.
And that's its pattern happening there.
And then meanwhile, you've got some other trait moving,
evolving in a punctuated manner.
I guess it doesn't go down.
And you put enough of these together
and have enough punctuated events happening,
and on a whole population level, you've
just invented gradualism.
You don't have to choose.
You can have it all.
You can have it all.
So a resolution there.
Both are almost certainly happening.
So what does this set us up for now?
Now that we have finished this bucket,
we are now ready on Friday-- what is today?
Wednesday.
We are now ready on Friday to move to the next bucket, which
is a very different world of trying to make sense
of the genetics of behavior.
Last week's version, you make up stories
built around individual selection,
kin selection, group selection, and come up
with the best story around to show
me something more predictive.
And you win.
This week's version, showing actual genetic changes
over the course of time.
What patterns of evolutionary change
will those code for with what consequences
for understanding the evolution of behavior, competition,
reproductive strategies, all of that?
By the end of this week, switching over
instead to the world of behavior geneticists, where
they try to understand what's going on by looking
at-- so somebody gets adopted.
Do they share a trait more with their adoptive parents
or their biological parents?
You look at identical twins versus non-identical ones.
You look at identical twins who were adopted
into different families right at birth, put them back together.
A whole world of trying to make sense that way.
And what we'll see is the same deal
is with this-- what counts as finishing, coming up
with an explanation-- last week's social biology
approaches-- this version of this
is the starting point for the next discipline.
So we'll pick up on that on Friday.
Oh, my god.
He let us out.
 OK, let's get going.
Let's see.
First off, apologies for Friday.
Sometimes, what seems like a flawless set
of connecting flights on paper turn out not to be in reality.
So hopefully, people made good use of the time.
OK.
We are ready for our next bucket, our next bucket,
our third one in this series, just in time
to convince you that we just keep jumping these.
As soon as you get accustomed to one approach, here
we are, yet another one, where we
are going to trash everything that's come before us.
OK.
What have been the two broad approaches so far?
The first one, the sociobiological/evolutionary
psychology one-- behavior evolves
exactly under the same sort of wind tunnel of selection
as does the heart of a giraffe, blah, blah,
that whole song and dance.
Following certain rules, you could
generate fairly structured predictions
about social behavior.
And then, the we-win version of using that is,
here's what we predict.
Here is the way we explain this complex system
of social behavior, using these rules which
assume certain degrees of heritability of behavior,
following certain rules of evolution.
And until you come up with a better explanation
for how this goes on, we win.
This is how behavior works.
Then we shifted over to the molecular end.
And what we saw was, on a certain sort of trendy level,
molecular biology is the answer to the people who
would sit around to the sociobiologists
and say, show me the genes.
Show me the genes for what you keep
talking about inferentially.
And what we saw was how evolutionary change works out
in the DNA level.
Very importantly, the common mechanisms
for microevolutionary change and how that supports
the picture of gradualism.
And then seeing all of these relatively new, unexpected ways
in which you are getting big time changes in DNA,
all these amplifying effects of macroevolution,
and suddenly support for punctuated equilibrium
in two ways.
The first one being, as soon as you
get one, little, tiny mutation affecting transcription
factors, affecting splicing enzymes,
affecting entire networks, it is going
to be real rare that you don't get
a mutation that's a disaster.
Stabilizing.
Stasis, that's the long-term feature
of the punctuated equilibrium.
The equilibrium part and the punctuated
seeing how, under circumstances of extreme selection,
something that is come up with is wildly adaptive, wildly
advantageous, quickly fixates in the society.
And thus, we have step functions.
OK.
So what we do today-- and Wednesday is now
shift to another field-- thinking about behavior
in a genetic context, in a heritable context,
this whole field of behavior genetics.
And what you'll see is, depending on your stripe,
either these are a bunch of really powerful approaches
for being able to infer some sort of genetic components
to behavior, often getting a whole lot of insight
into what's going on, and in some cases,
a more negative view, more critical one,
the entire field is gibberish.
And a way to summarize the view of it as being gibberish
was this great cartoon I saw a while back.
OK, two scientists are standing around the lab.
And they've got their lab coats on,
and their test tubes, and going about doing science stuff.
And one of them is saying to the other one,
you know how sometimes you're on the phone with someone,
and you've been talking for a long time,
and it seems like they decide they want to get off,
but they don't want to say they want to get off,
so they say, I probably shouldn't keep you any longer,
even though you're not the one wanting to get off,
because they're the one who wants to get off?
Well, I think I found the gene for that.
[LAUGHTER]
And that winds up being one of the criticisms of the behavior
genetics.
Once again, this world of inferring genetic bases
to behavior in often the most deterministic possible way
and using techniques which are often complete nonsense.
And what we'll see are the tools of behavior geneticists,
and all the criticisms, and why this winds up
being a very contentious field.
OK.
So this being another version of getting at, how do you
know when a behavior has a genetic component.
And we're immediately allowing ourselves
to be a little more subtle here, not determined by genes,
not determined purely by nature.
All of that merely to have a genetic component,
a genetic influence, how do you begin to do that?
And this is a world where people, the scientists,
don't sit around coming up with evolutionary models.
They don't sit around trying to find mutations in genes.
They have a very different sort of strategy.
They look for patterns of shared traits
among the individuals who have differing degrees
of shared genes and infer, related to this,
and infer genetic influences from that.
OK, what's the simplest most mindless version of doing this?
The basic initial rules, centuries ago,
when behavior genetics started , was the notion,
if you see a trait that is universal in a species,
obviously, it's genetic.
Obviously, it's hard-wired.
Obviously, it's instinctual.
Obviously, that's an extremely limited approach.
Yes, indeed.
You will see some species, like flies,
in which certain behavioral traits are determined
by relatively small numbers of genes and are universal.
This is obviously going to fall apart
when you get to something more interesting than a fly.
So what's a much more the starting point
for the whole field is to say, ooh, look.
Here's some behavioral traits that run in families.
Genes run in families.
Therefore, we may have just found evidence
for a genetic influence on these traits.
And of course, it takes about an eighth
of a second to come up with the retort to that, which is, yes,
genes run in families, but environment runs in families
as well.
So the standard response is to now
put a little bit more strictures on it,
to say, OK, it's not just that genes run in families,
but as we know, from a few weeks ago, the more closely related
you are, the more genes you share in common.
Our Mendelian rule of half the genes
with full sibling, et cetera.
Following thus, the logic that, if you have a behavioral trait
that becomes more common the more closely related two
individuals are, now you're inferring something
about genetics.
And of course, the problem there is not only,
as you become more closely related to somebody,
do you share a greater percentage of your genes,
you share environment more.
Obviously, you are sharing environment on the average,
in most cases, much more with a sibling than
with a first cousin, than with an eighth cousin.
The trouble is shared genes and shared environment
tend to co-variant families.
So that greatly weakens what was the initial classic approach
to the field 70, 80 years ago.
OK.
So you've got to come up with something fancier,
something more informative, something more subtle.
And what you wind up doing then is,
let's control for environment.
Yes, obviously, the eighth cousin
is living in a different world than your full sibling.
Let's control for environment under circumstances
where you examine relatives where
they have the same environment, and they
differ in terms of the amount of genes they share.
And what is this classic approach?
Look at identical twins versus fraternal twins,
monozygotic twins, from one zygote, monozygotic, identical
twins versus dizygotic.
And the general notion there is, OK, identical twins
share 100% of their genes.
Fraternal twins share 50% of their genes.
So if identical twins are raised in the exact same environment,
and fraternal twins are raised in the exact same environment,
they all have environments shared.
What's the only difference then to explain
any behavioral differences, if you
see a trait that is shared to a greater
extent in a pair of identical twins, than in fraternal twins?
What's the only difference?
They all grow up with identical environments.
It's because the identical twins have twice the amount
of genes in common, 100%.
You could thus infer a genetic influence on that trait,
because it's the identical environment.
Twins get raised absolutely the same.
And the only difference is the degree
of relatedness, the degree of shared
genes between monozygotic and dizygotic twins.
That one should take about 2/8 of a second to demolish,
for the simple starting point that,
oh, yeah, sometimes fraternal twins, dizygotic twins,
are different sexes.
OK.
So that complicates things.
So you come back and you're a little bit more rigorous now.
And you restrict your comparisons of monozygotic
to dizygotic, to same-sex dizygotic pairs.
And then you institute this rule,
OK, same-sex twins, whether identical or fraternal,
are raised essentially in the same environment.
The same environment.
So if you see a greater sharing of traits
among the monozygotic twins than the dizygotic,
the only place that greater sharing could be attributed to
is the fact that they have more genes in common.
Ah.
We have just identified a behavior that
has a strong genetic component.
So the big problem with that approach
is-- anyone-- who's a twin in here?
Whoa.
That's a lot of hands.
Identical twins?
Dizygotic twins?
Any triplets?
OK.
Just to extend that, armadillos always
give birth to four identical offspring at once.
[LAUGHTER]
OK.
[LAUGHTER]
So that having been prompted, what we then move on to
is the obvious problem with this entire approach.
Hurray.
Monozygotic twins get raised in virtually the same environment.
Dizygotic twins of the same gender
get raised in virtually the same environment.
That's not true in the slightest.
There is far more differentiation of environment
for dizygotic twins than for monozygotic twins.
They are treated differently, as pairs.
Thus, if behavioral traits are more in
common between monozygotic twins than between dizygotic,
it could be because these guys share more genes in common,
and/or because they share more environment, a completely
flawed approach in that regard.
The next complication.
It turns out, monozygotic twins don't always
have the exact same environment.
Well, yes.
Obviously, one of them gets sneezed on at a higher rate
by a kid sister, or something.
And that's going to produce just decades worth of consequences.
But even in other domains, monozygotic twins
don't get treated exactly the same, in some circumstances.
And here is what it looks like, if I had drawn it.
OK.
So you've got your twins.
And this is during fetal life.
And there are fetuses in there.
And OK, there's one with a little thing of hair.
And there's the other.
OK.
And what you have is a placenta forms.
And here's the deal.
With monozygotic twins, if they split during the first five
days after conception, they wind up,
each one, with their own placenta.
On the other hand, if the split occurs between days five
and 10, there's already commitment to one placenta,
which they then share.
So monochorionic pregnancy, or bichorionic.
And what does that wind up meaning?
In the monochorionic, the two fetuses
share a blood stream, to a greater extent,
than in the bichorionic circumstance.
In these cases, it's separate blood flow from mom.
OK, it's still the same mom, and it's still
ultimately the same blood, but it's
going to be subtle differences in the levels of stuff
in the bloodstream.
With the monochorionic, the environment for these fetuses
are much more similar, in terms of whatever
is carried in the bloodstream.
OK, great.
That's a great factoid.
And that's like interesting, things about identical twins.
But like different levels of nutrients,
whether it's coming off of a blood vessel here,
versus there, OK, maybe that makes a difference.
But these are going to be minuscule differences.
Nothing interesting.
As one example of it, monochorionic identical twins
have more similar IQs than do bichorionic identical twins.
Just one demonstration that this could make a difference.
This is relevant.
The IQs are more similar.
And this has been one reason why marmoset monkeys-- marmoset
monkeys, pair bonding, so you know
what they're all about-- among other things,
marmoset monkey mothers always give birth
to twins, because there is two parents around to take
care of them.
And it's got a completely screwy circulatory system
for the twins that are unlike either of these.
And there's all sorts of people who've
been interested in marmosets over the years--
the ones who couldn't afford to by themselves armadillos--
interested in terms of looking at the differences in blood
flow during fetal life there of twins.
OK.
So we start off here that, just because you see something
more in common in monozygotic twins
than dizygotic, that doesn't tell you
the first thing about whether it's genes involved.
They share our environment much more.
Then even trying to make sense of what's
going on in monozygotic.
What you've got there are fundamental potential
differences, environment, starting
at a very important early state of life.
So monochorionic versus bichorionic.
What else then?
How about another one where you can look at a behavioral trait,
looking at traits and traits differences,
according to some genetic trait and where
environment is the same?
How about gender differences?
Whoa.
OK.
So genes have something to do with producing
what your gender is.
And environment being the same, if you
see differences between females and males,
that's attributable to the different genetics.
OK.
And you should be able to nuke that one within seconds, as
well, which is the notion of shared
environment, the notion of identical environmental
experience.
To give you a sense of how subtle this
is, at one hour of life, on the average, the level of activity,
the rate of movement, the amount of movement of limbs,
on the average, is greater among newborn boys
than newborn girls.
Whoa.
That's there like within an hour of getting born.
That's not a whole lot of time for environment
having gone on there.
Maybe you're seeing a strong genetic effect.
What other studies have shown is, from the first moments
of post-natal life, mothers are already
interacting differently with baby girls than with baby boys.
From the first interaction, from the very first holding of them,
there's differences in how long they are held.
There are differences in proximity to the body,
to the face.
So Whoa.
Sex differences in behavior at one hour.
Sex differences in environment within mere moments
after being born.
So that weakens that one.
And this came through in another realm.
This was a study that was done in the '80s, that
was enormously influential, by a pair of scientists at Johns
Hopkins, Benbow and Stanley.
And it had to do with a program that I'd bet a lot of you
guys had something or other to do with back
when, which is the Johns Hopkins Gifted Youth Program
thing, which I bet all sorts of you
guys qualified for at various points
and got the Johns Hopkins blue ribbons pasted
to your forehead.
And that was part of this massive study that's
been going on for decades and decades of kids who
are very gifted, academically, and in a number
of different realms.
And Benbow and Stanley were some of the senior researchers
on this.
And this was a study they did when they had
40,000 kids in their database.
And they asked a very simple question,
which was, well, what does IQ distribution
look like in this population as a function of what sex you are?
And back came a very interesting finding,
which was a highly, highly, highly significant difference
in the average IQ between girls and boys,
in the direction of boys having a higher IQ.
Moreover, when you looked at the tail of the distribution,
the highest IQ range, what you saw
there was approximately a 13:1 ratio, way out at this extreme.
They then followed up and did the exact same thing-- no,
they didn't do IQ.
What am I talking about?
They did math.
Ignore that.
Erase all of that.
OK, let's start over.
[LAUGHTER]
So lots of you probably got the Benbow and Stanley sweatshirts
when you were part of that program.
So they were looking at math skills, yes, junior high school
kids who were taking the math part of the SATs.
That's part of getting into this Hopkins program.
So they took the math SATs and they looked at those 40,000
scores and saw that there was a gender
difference in the average score on the math SATs,
with boys scoring higher.
Not only that, but when they looked out
at the tail here-- OK, I'm back on track-- when they looked out
at the tail here at the highest math achievement,
there was a ratio of 13:1, boys to girls
OK, so that was pretty striking.
And in their paper, which was published in Science,
was a very, very critical phrase.
Their rationale for doing this study on kids
that age was the fact that-- at least,
at the time in most schools, middle school,
junior high school-- kids have not differentiated classes yet.
They're not yet at the point where
you could choose to take extra math classes, to choose
to take the absolute minimum.
This was still the stage where most kids in this country
are getting the exact same math classes.
Everyone is still getting the same.
And thus, at that point, they could include in their paper
a phrase along the lines of, since all the children had
essentially identical educational environments,
any gender differences seen in it are reflecting--
and they used the word, "biological"--
are reflecting biological differences.
This was one hell of a famous study.
This was front page all over the place.
This wound up being shown in a very large article in Time,
and in Newsweek, the Reader's Digest--
which I know, sort of, everyone is supposed
to make fun of-- but the Reader's Digest, at least--
does it still exist?
Yes.
Yes, it does.
OK.
Throughout the 1980s, the Reader's Digest
was the most widely read magazine
in this country, which is astonishing,
showing what percentage of people read in the bathroom,
so having to go with the Reader's Digest there.
And the Reader's Digest covered this and used the phrase,
"The math gene," and discussing how
this was the definitive study showing that more boys have
the "math gene."
Like, you already know that's like nonsense
on so many different levels.
But this was all over the place.
This was the study that definitively
showed genetic differences in math skills by sex,
and definitively showed that this was manifest at a stage
before there were different educational environments,
in terms of math.
And what, of course, completely rips apart
that study-- and it was shameful that thing was ever published,
let alone got as much attention as it
did-- is the fact that the environment was not exactly
the same.
Endless number of studies have shown, beginning
by first grade, if it is a simple math
problem at that stage for the same hands put up,
a boy is more likely to be called on than a girl.
Studies showing that, for the same correct answer,
boys in elementary schools are more
likely to be praised for the correct answer than are girls.
By the time junior high school is coming around,
guidance counselors are already differentially,
by sex, advising, once you get into high school,
to take more elective math.
Tremendous, massive differences in environment.
And this study, using this whole argument of,
if there's an identical environment,
and you see differences, it's due to genes.
And predicated on that, if that's not
true in our afterlife, it was ludicrous
that they were making this argument about 13-year-olds.
So this was a paper with enormous influence
in every major newspaper in the country.
Scientists have discovered the "math gene."
And boys have them more than girls.
We will come back to that study later on,
because something much, much more interesting was going on.
OK.
So those were the limits in the sex difference end of it.
So what can you do next?
There's a flip side, another approach,
that the behavior geneticists use, which
is basically the converse.
Now, you look at individuals getting
raised in the same environment who don't share genes.
Same environment, different genes.
Rather than just now the different genes,
same environment nonsense about gender differences,
even down to monozygotic twins, all of that,
but now the flip side, same environment
and different genes.
What was the paradigm for this?
The one that is used over, and over, and over again,
the standard approach in this part of the field
is adoption studies.
You take someone who is adopted as a child,
and they are now raised in a household of people
who they are not related to, their adoptive, non-biological
parents.
And what you now begin to look at
are patterns of shared traits.
Specifically, what is looked at is,
when you see a trait in someone who was adopted,
who are they more likely to share that trait with?
Their biological parents, or parent?
Or with an adoptive parent?
Now, the logic of this is completely straightforward.
And this has been sort of the standard paradigm in animal
studies of the genetics of behavior for centuries,
something called cross-fostering.
You take a newborn litter and another newborn litter,
and you switch them between moms so that they
were raised by different moms.
And they're raised with, thus, someone they're not related to,
but someone who they now have environmental shared with them.
Or in the litter cross-fostering studies,
you will take half of a litter and switch it
to another mother, half-- so you see how the iterations there
go.
So that was essentially the rationale
for how this would be done in humans.
And this was the basis of one study
in the late '60s, early '70s, which
was the landmark study in genetic psychiatry,
in behavioral genetics as a whole, a study carried out
by a guy at Harvard, named Seymour Kety.
And this was a phenomenal study and phenomenally important.
Here's what Kety did.
Kety was dealing with the notion at the time of making
sense of schizophrenia.
And as we will see when we get to the schizophrenia lecture,
the number of nutty ideas out there as
to what the cause of this disease is is just staggering.
But what he was interested in was
getting at the notion that was kind of floating around
in some corners of the field at the time, which
is schizophrenia has a biological component,
a genetic component.
And what that was was viewed as very unlikely.
But what Kety did was try to go and test this.
So what's he going to do?
He's going to look at adopted individuals who
are schizophrenic and see are they
more likely to share that trait with a biological parent
or adoptive parent.
You see the logic already.
OK, how many schizophrenic adoptees
are you going to find out there where you also
were able to figure out who the biological parents were.
This was not an easy task.
And Kety's insight, his intuition,
was to go to one of the places on Earth where that was most
easily done, which is Scandinavia,
where all the Scandinavian countries keep records like you
cannot believe about everything on Earth.
People understanding, for example,
how the age of puberty onset in girls
have been decreasing for centuries.
They're always using Scandinavian data,
because every single thing that could possibly be recorded
has been written down and stored someplace there
in moth-proof vaults.
And what he was able to do in ways that no human subjects
committee on earth would approve these days,
is go through the entire database of adoptees in Denmark
and identify all of the cases where somebody adopted had
wound up with schizophrenia, and then
able to go back and see who the biological parents
and the adoptive parents were.
Was a staggeringly large study.
He and a team of psychiatrists spent years in Denmark
doing this, because one of the things they did
was they then did follow-ups.
And they themselves interviewed all
of the potentially schizophrenic individuals
on there, so that they would have
the same diagnostic standards all across the board.
As we'll see in the schizophrenia lecture,
it's a very squishy diagnosis.
So having the same psychiatrists interviewing
every possible person, hugely important control.
This is part of what took them years and years.
And then they finally were able to say
what the patterns of similarity were.
And here's what they wound up saying.
You take any random person on the street who
is schizophrenic, and you take any other random person
off the street, and you ask what are the odds
that the second person shares this trait
with the first person?
About 1% likelihood.
What's that another way of stating?
In the population as a whole, there's
about a 1% incidence of schizophrenia.
So you start with the circumstance
where the biological parents, neither of them
had schizophrenia, and neither of the adoptive parents do.
And what's the incidence in this population among adoptees?
A 1% schizophrenia rate.
That's just average people off the street.
That's the usual rate across Western European population.
So 1% rate.
Now, let's have the person growing up
in a different sort of household.
This is a person who has no biological legacy
of schizophrenia, but was brought up
in an adoptive household with a schizophrenic parent.
And what you saw then was a 3% chance,
which, with this enormous sample size,
was a highly significant, reliable number.
So in a rough kind of way, being raised in a household
with an adoptive parent who is schizophrenic
approximately triples your risk of a schizophrenia diagnosis.
But then, the really critical one, which is you
were raised in a household where neither parent,
adoptive parent, is schizophrenic,
but you have a biological legacy among your biological parents
of schizophrenia.
What do you see?
A 9% incidence.
Approximately a three-fold increase above that, almost
a 10-fold difference now over what you
see in the general population.
This one number was what roared through the field.
This was viewed as the clearest evidence
to date for a genetic component to a psychiatric disorder.
Regular old person off the street, 1% rate.
Have a biological parent with schizophrenia
and share no environment with them, because you got adopted
away, and almost 10-fold higher chance of getting the disease.
Then, final thing, looking at the incredibly rare people who
got screwed on more different fronts than you can imagine,
who had a biological parent with schizophrenia, and phew,
got out of there, and landed in an adoptive household
with a schizophrenic parent.
[LAUGHTER]
So you get the double whammy there.
And what you saw was a 17% incidence.
What's interesting about that number?
OK, what this cell does, what this number does,
is reflect the increased risk by having
a biological legacy of schizophrenia,
plus the increased risk of having
an adoptive environmental legacy of schizophrenia.
So let's see.
What's the difference between 1 and 3?
That's 2.
So the difference between 1 and 9, that's 8.
So thus, it should be about 10 percentage points.
It should be about a 10% rate.
What are you seeing here?
A synergism.
Get yourself a biological legacy and get yourself
a schizophrenia household to grow up in,
and it is not just adding the two degrees of risk.
There was a synergism, a non-additive synergism.
That is an important hint for us of stuff to come.
So this was this landmark study.
This was phenomenally difficult to have pulled off.
It got Kety a number of Nobel Prize nominations.
This was the study that showed the first definitive modern
science evidence for a heritable basis
to a psychiatric disorder.
And this became the gold standard
for how to do behavioral genetic studies.
And in the aftermath of that, people
began to do adoptive studies on heritability
between biological and adoptive households,
heritability of depression, heritability of alcoholism,
heritability of criminality.
And you can see heading off in all sorts
of interesting directions from there all sorts
of interesting ones, and them always producing
a number that would be higher in this cell of the matrix
than that cell, and always producing the notion
that one has just shown a strong genetic component
to whatever that trait is.
That trait-- IQ.
That trait-- criminal behavior.
That trait-- alcoholism.
These were some very loaded studies,
in terms of the implications.
So what is the problem with that approach?
A number of problems.
The first one is that, under the best of circumstances--
best of circumstances, best of circumstances for people
trying to publish papers out of this--
under the cleanest of circumstances,
the individuals in the study were adopted away,
were taken from the biological parents, a quarter of a second
after being born.
No postnatal shared environment whatsoever.
What one knows, of course, is that's not
the case with adoption.
And there's varying amounts of lag time before it occurs.
And they were never able to factor that into the analyses.
OK, so environment-- so you've got two and a half days
worth of environment with your biological parents
at the beginning there.
OK, so that's a confound "give me a break, though."
Just a couple of days, that's going to explain differences
like these?
What, of course, is also linking around
in there is the huge, whopping topic
of prenatal affects, prenatal environment shared with mom.
And we're about to see in a little while
some absolutely astonishing realms
in which prenatal environment has very long-term effects.
OK, so that's a huge confound.
So how could you control for that?
You see a trait that an individual shares in common
with a biological parent, despite being adopted away
a second after birth, all of that.
And thus, you can infer there's a biological,
there's a genetic component to this trait.
Uh-oh.
Wait a second.
Shared environment with the mother,
that may explain some of the shared traits.
How do you get by that then?
The difference in the likelihood of sharing a biological trait,
a trait with a biological mother,
versus a biological father, is the measure
then of the prenatal effect.
If a trait is shared 10% with the biological father and 17%
with the biological mother, the 7%
is attributable to prenatal effects.
That was the general conclusion that the field
made at that point for dealing with this irksome little
problem, this pesky little thing of prenatal environment, which
is going to come back big time in a few minutes.
That was how they were distinguished.
So some more problems with that approach.
One is one that absolutely tortures behavior geneticists
the world over, one which makes them just
want to have people being inbred strains
where they could keep them in cages and keep track of them.
The problem being that, often, the guy saying he's the father
ain't actually the father.
Oh, issues of paternity uncertainty.
That sure screws up your genetic studies,
if you're trying to attribute stuff to someone who turns out
not to be related.
Very much higher rates than the people at Reader's Digest
would have you believe, the rate at which the person claiming
to be the father is not actually the biological father.
OK, that's a bummer.
That makes things more complicated.
One other big confound in the adoption approach.
And this was something that was emphasized by a guy
at Princeton, Leon Kamin, a psychologist there,
doing a very good job of showing that adoptive family
placements were non-random.
When a child is adopted, you don't sit there
and close your eyes and spin the globe
and put your finger down in some place,
and two minutes later this kid born in, like, Shaker Heights,
is running around with some camel herders in Rajasthan.
This is not done.
It is not random placement.
Instead, what is a policy in virtually every adoptive agency
in this country is to try to match
the kids, as much as possible, along a number
of different domains.
In other words, you are also sharing a lot of biology
with the adoptive parents.
And that completely screws up the analyses.
Adoption is non-random, how it is done.
One does not just spin the globe.
And instead, there are very intentional attempts
to try to match for certain traits, traits which have
genetic influences on them.
OK.
So that's a big problem.
So the adoptive approach had tons and tons
of interesting findings, enormously influential.
But over the years, people have realized, more and more,
prenatal effects, paternity uncertainty.
And from day one, being pointed out that adoptive parents
have higher than random rates of shared genes with the adoptees,
in most cases, in this country.
OK.
So what becomes the next approach?
And this one wound up being the gold standard,
the high watermark, of how to do behavior genetics.
Behavior geneticists who are able to do this sort of study,
the rest of the behavior geneticists
hate them, because they've got the best toys out there
to play with.
And they've got the coolest things going.
And they're always snotty, because they've
got the best possible circumstance, the most perfect
thing you can imagine, which is identical twins separated
at birth.
Whoa.
That must be one hell of an experiment to have pulled off,
identical twins separated at birth.
It turns out, every now and then, a pair of identical twins
are adopted very soon after birth
where each one is adopted into a different household.
Perfect.
Perfect.
Different environments, different households,
identical genes, you could not possibly ask for something
better than that.
People, like, wet their pants when the identical twins
separated at birth paradigm burst on the scene.
This was so wonderful.
People wrote poems about identical twins
separated at birth, sonnets.
It was the best.
It was so informative, because look
at the power of this approach.
This is an incredibly powerful approach.
The two individuals are raised in different environments,
but they've got the exact same genes.
So the question becomes, where are you
going to find identical twins separated at birth?
And there's one obsessive geneticist, behavior
geneticist, University of Minnesota, Tom Bouchard,
has done an entire career not only studying these folks,
but God knows how he finds these people.
But he first started publishing when
he had 40 pairs of identical twins separated at birth
re-united in adulthood.
And that made for some incredible, bizarre,
heartwarming stories of discovering
your long-lost identical sibling and produced a mountain's worth
of data.
It was a bizarre literature from day one.
First one being, that you would get the perfect case there.
And what these guys would be reporting in the literature
was totally nutty stuff.
OK, so you've got one of these pairs of identical twins.
And they're born.
And Wolfie winds up being raised in Uruguay by neo-Nazis.
And Shmuel gets raised in Israel by his highly orthodox
whatevers.
[LAUGHTER]
And then, as a result of a game show quirk of fate,
they're suddenly brought back together.
And there is Wolfie and Shmuel, who are identical twins.
And what do they report?
The most amazing thing they have in common,
they both flush the toilet both before and after they
go to the toilet.
[LAUGHTER]
You think I'm being facetious.
Go back to that literature when that first came out
and the coverage in the press.
And it would be things like, Wolfie and Shmuel, they both
have, like, a poodle named Fluffy.
And the flushing the toilet before and after going
to the bathroom, that was one of the landmark early findings
of these studies.
They would find twins that would do that.
They would find twins who were both married to somebody
named Congolia, or something.
[LAUGHTER]
And they'd, oh, my god.
This is totally amazing.
That was what hit the pages, initially,
these obscure, little, bizarre similarities
within a backdrop of, well, what's
the data actually showing?
And what's by now a twin registry of probably a couple
of hundreds sets of these twins--
and this has become the cottage industry of the best behavior
genetics around-- what has come out of that literature is
the most solid, reliable findings is about 50%
heritability of IQ.
About 50% heritability of where you
are on the introversion, extroversion scale, and about
50% heritability for degree of aggression.
That's kind of interesting.
And what we will see is there's all sorts of problems
with this approach as well.
First one being, starting right off,
back to that Kamin guy from Princeton,
his critique-- turns out there were not
a whole lot of Wolfies and Shmuels.
Even though they got adopted into different families,
there again was the non-random placement in families,
more similar environments than one would have
anticipated purely by chance.
So that is a confound.
OK, so what's the solution for that one?
I know.
Let's look at monozygotic twins separated at birth
and reunited on Oprah at age 50, and then
look at dizygotic twins separated at birth
and reunited after the commercial break on Oprah,
and see what similarities are.
And if you see more things in common with the monozygotics,
rather than the dizygotics, you've
just controlled for the non-random placement
in the adoptive homes.
The extent to which the monozygotics
have traits more in common than the dizygotics, that
reflects the identical genes.
That was the interpretation.
That was a very powerful sort of analysis,
one that, nonetheless, winds up being very limited.
Because in this case, because of tiny sample size,
it's really hard to have done those studies.
What's another feature of the whole behavior genetics
approach?
Here's another one.
If you see traits that occur, behavioral traits,
in the absence of any learning, in the absence
of any environmental experience, in the absence of anything that
can count as being non-genetic, if you see that,
you're looking at a genetic influence.
And what are the examples that are always given?
The fact that all babies all over the universe
start smiling, and they use the exact same set of muscles.
And they always start smiling socially around, roughly,
the same age.
And what you also see-- I don't want
to know how these were done-- but these classic photographs
that you can get filming of kids in utero--
I don't know what fiber optic something or other
was doing that-- but the demonstration
that fetuses smile.
Fetuses smile during the third trimester.
This is a motoric pattern that is shared among all humans.
OK.
Well, social smiling, you see the flaw there,
which is that is very subject to shaping of behavior.
You are three months old, and you're
watching all this social smiling going on around you, and how
the mannequins they have at home are nowhere near as
interesting as the animated faces there.
And you sort of try it out yourself.
What you see it's the exact same developmental time
course for smiling among congenitally blind babies,
babies who never see anybody smiling.
So you see the motor pattern here
being something that is arguably fairly universal
and occurring in the absence of any sort of training,
how you go about smiling.
The other example that's always used
is with congenitally deaf babies.
And what you get there is another universal, which
is beginning to babble at the exact same age
that hearing kids begin to babble,
and the same argument being made there.
Of course, you have a very uphill task there of ruling out
any environmental similarities.
Because once again, once again, an area
that has been utterly under-appreciated
in this whole field is the whole world
of prenatal environmental effects.
And the theme that's going to come out of that is environment
does not begin at birth.
And some environmental effects prenatally
are enormously influential forever after.
And if you showed up on the scene one second
after that individual was born, all
of the tools of modern behavior genetics
would tell you that you were looking
at a genetic trait, where it is one instead
that was brought about by the prenatal environment.
OK, let's take a five-minute break,
and then we will pick up on that.
--good ones.
First one being going back to that gender difference
business, the assumption running through the field
that, OK, boys and girls are raised in the same environment
by their parents.
And the only thing that differs is the genes.
Like even those people, behavior geneticists,
believe that could be the case.
No, they recognized this was a very limited approach,
and thus would limit themselves to circumstances
like the first hour of post-natal life, which
we already saw is a flawed assumption,
or under circumstances where everybody's
had the same number of math problems
to take in their first 12 years of life.
And we see the problem with that.
Nonetheless, there was the recognition
that that was a very limited set of tools
for getting at these issues.
The other useful thing that was brought up
was somebody pointing out that, in the extended notes
for behavior genetics, in the second paragraph, somewhere
in there, about the fourth or fifth line,
is the very clearly typed out word, "unable."
And pointing out that, actually, the word
was supposed to be "able."
So you might want to take a look at that
and kind of keep that one in mind.
OK, perhaps I should take a look at it also.
Moving on.
Moving on now to this business, all of the approaches
we've been seeing about comparing
monozygotic with dizygotic.
By the way, with the identical twins, 2/3 of them
have monochorionic.
1/3 are split.
And how many of you who are identical twins absolutely
know in your heart of heart right now whether you
were a monochorionic or bichorionic twin?
OK.
Well, that didn't work very well.
OK.
So pushing on.
What we see here is, with all of these approaches,
the adoption, the twins separated at birth,
the twins, mono versus dizygotic, et cetera,
et cetera, all of those were predicated
on one simple assumption, which is,
environment begins at birth.
And that has been completely destroyed
in some incredibly interesting ways in recent years.
We have very vibrant literature at this point.
First way that it can go down, which
is your prenatal environment.
What are you having as a prenatal environment?
Who are you sharing environment with?
Obviously, with your mother.
You are sharing blood.
You are sharing blood, and thus the things
that she is experiencing in the world around her that
make for a different environment than the person standing
next to her gets translated into effects on the fetus.
First domain, hormonal ones.
Here's one example of something that you will wind up seeing.
This was worked on by a guy named, Fred Vom Saal,
at University of Missouri.
And what he did was look at the fact
that rats give birth to litters of about a dozen kids
at a time.
And there's some circulatory system thing.
They look like a whole necklace of fetuses there.
And the circulatory system is such
that everybody's getting blood, but you're
getting preferentially the blood that
is from the siblings right around you.
There's some sort of looping thing
that occurs with the blood system that looks just
like that.
And what you wind up getting is you have a particularly shared
blood environment with the siblings on either side of you.
And what he asked was something very simple.
You are a female rat fetus.
And in one case, you're sitting there
with brothers on each side.
In another case, one brother and one
sister, or in the final case, obviously, with two sisters
on either side.
And what you wind up getting is a different hormonal
environment.
How does that translate out later?
The more male siblings you have around you as a fetus,
the later you're going to reach puberty.
That's interesting, suggesting that very local endocrine
effects here play out in something like that.
Also, it predicts how estrogen levels are going
to drop in you later in life.
So this winds up being one very interesting
prenatal environment.
Here's another one.
Here we have, in humans, the age of one's mother
when she gave birth-- and extrapolating a little bit here
at both ends, but just assume this is kind of the age range.
And what we see here is the age of puberty onset
in the offspring.
And what is seen is very young mothers and very old mothers
have offspring who reach puberty later than women
in a more intermediate age.
What does that appear to be due to?
Differing estrogen levels.
Higher levels of estrogen at this point in life--
it's actually not symmetrical.
It's skewed a little bit this way--
and that seems to be the driving force on it.
Whoa.
The age at which you reach puberty
has to do with how old the fetal sack was that you hung out
for nine months?
That has an influence?
Absolutely.
So prenatal effects.
More.
Another version of it.
Suppose now the hormone you're getting
inundated with through the bloodstream
is a stress hormone.
A stress hormone-- glucocorticoids,
we will learn all about those down the line--
a stress hormone, because mom is stressed.
What are some of the consequences?
For the same prenatal stress, as an adult,
you will have a smaller brain-- if you're a rat.
You will have a thinner cortex.
You will have less learning abilities.
You will be more prone towards anxiety.
You will have fewer of those benzodiazepine receptors
that we heard about the other day.
You will have more of a cognitive decline
when you are a doddering old rat.
All sorts of stuff will go differently
throughout your entire life.
But get this.
OK, look at this mechanism.
So you are a rat.
And your mother was stressed when
you were a fetus back when.
And you were marinated in those glucocorticoids
when you were a fetus.
Your brain, overall, will be smaller.
There's one particular brain region,
which I won't mention right now because it's not
really critical, there's one brain region
that's particularly hard hit.
What does that brain region do?
Among other things, it helps to turn off the stress response.
So if that part of the brain is smaller,
you're not as good at blocking glucocorticoid secretion
at the end of stress.
And somebody with a normal-sized whatever, something stressful
occurs, and they recover.
And you do this instead.
Because this mysterious part of the brain is smaller,
is not giving as much of a negative feedback signal.
And for people new to endocrinology, that's something
you'll be getting in a couple weeks.
The net result is, if this part of the brain is smaller,
you will have more lifetime exposure to glucocorticoids.
So what happens next?
What happens next, in addition, baseline is also
elevated in these individuals.
So the net result is a lot more cumulative exposure.
So you are a female rat.
And you were in a mother who was stressed prenatally
when you were a fetus.
And as a result, in addition to all the other problems
that you've got lifelong, you secrete higher
than expected glucocorticoid levels.
And eventually, you get pregnant.
And thus, your fetus is going to be exposed
to elevated glucocorticoid levels
and will be born with a somewhat smaller brain, thinner
cortex, et cetera, et cetera.
What have we just shown?
An environmental manipulation on a pregnant female
manifesting itself two generations later
in the grandchildren.
And when this was first described in the early '60s,
this was called the grandmother effect.
And eventually, it was shown to go out
about four or five generations.
The magnitude the effect would get smaller
with each generation, before it disappeared.
But look at what this is about.
This is inheriting a trait that is not genetic.
And this wound up being the first example of what is now
called, non-Mendelian inheritance
of traits, non-genetic inheritance of traits.
And all you've got going here is prenatal environment.
Extremely powerful observation.
And what you also then have is, your some researcher,
and again, you come along one second
after the animal is born.
And you wind up studying, saying oh, look at this.
This rat tends to have elevated glucocorticoid levels, just
like mom.
And this rat tends to have a thinner cortex, just like mom.
And this rat-- and if you've never
heard of prenatal environmental effects, what's
the only conclusion you could make?
There are genetic influences on these traits.
So these non-Mendelian, non-genetic transmission
of traits are really, really important.
Next thing.
What else is floating around in mom's bloodstream that
gets shared, besides hormones?
Nutrients.
Nutrients.
And this winds up producing something extremely interesting
as well.
OK, it's all a blur by now.
Have we already talked about Dutch Hunger Winter?
It was in the video we watched while you were gone.
Oh.
[BLOWS RASPBERRY] OK.
[LAUGHTER]
Well, now that you all know about-- what did I say?
That was only like 100 people, though.
OK.
OK, for those of you who didn't-- Dutch Hunger Winter,
here's the deal.
If you were a fetus in Holland during the winter of 1944,
something very interesting happened with you.
1944, Holland is still occupied by the Nazis.
Nazis are being pressured on all fronts.
In the process of losing, they're falling back.
They're losing a lot of the land they've occupied.
And what they decide to do that winter
is, because they need some food and because they wanted
to punish the Dutch for beginning to be more openly
in the resistance, what they did was, that winter,
they diverted all of the food in Holland to Germany.
And historically known as the Dutch Hunger Winter.
Essentially, people went from a perfectly fine,
healthy-- amid the context of a war--
Western-European diet, down to something
like that from out of nowhere.
40,000 people starved to death during the Dutch Hunger Winter.
Something very interesting occurred,
if you were a third-trimester fetus, during the Dutch Hunger
Winter, because it only lasted for the winter.
The Allies came in, liberated Holland after that.
And it went to something like this, something
resembling a step function of starvation
for about three months.
If you were third-trimester fetus during the Dutch Hunger
Winter, your body learned something important,
which is here is not a whole lot of calories out there.
During third trimester, fetuses are in some way--
and this is metaphorical-- deciding, learning how much,
in the way of nutrients out there
in the world, how readily do calories come in?
How is the fetus finding out?
By way of mom's circulation.
Mom is starving.
And thus, much lower levels of nutrients in the bloodstream.
And the fetus, at that point in development,
is saying, metaphorically, well, what's
it like out there in this place I'm going
to be heading to rather soon?
What's the nutritional profile like?
There's not much in the way of food out there.
And as a result, the fetus has-- and the term used now
is "metabolic programming."
There is metabolic programming, or metabolic imprinting--
notice the word "imprinting" here being
used in a completely different sense
than we've heard about already-- metabolic programming
to produce what is called a thrifty phenotype.
The fetus, realizing there is nothing out there
in the way of plentiful food, what it does
is it programs its pancreas to function in
a certain way forever after.
What does the pancreas do?
The smallest smidgen of food hits the bloodstream,
and the pancreas is pumping out insulin,
which helps store all that stuff and quickly scarf up
every bit of nutrient in the bloodstream
and store it away, because you've got
to be as efficient as possible.
And you've metabolically programmed your kidneys,
so that your kidneys are incredibly good at retaining
salt. Because along with starvation,
there's going to be salt shortages.
So really hold on to salt. And you are born with a body
with a thrifty metabolism, very good at retaining salt,
and spectacular at storing away every bit of nutrients
that hits the bloodstream.
So at that point, you go back to this sort of diet.
And you have that for the rest of your life.
And what has now been shown with the Dutch Hunger Winter
individuals, the ones who were third-trimester fetuses then,
as adults, they have a 19-fold increased incidence
of obesity, hypertension, diabetes, and what's
called metabolic syndrome.
What's that about?
Their body has programmed to be extremely
thrifty with metabolism.
And as such, it is forever after storing
away every of the grotesque Westernized diets
that we all wallow in.
And what you've got then is setting individuals
up for a much, much higher risk of these metabolic disorders.
If you were a newborn at the time, it didn't happen.
A newborn during here, the metabolic
programming is already over by then.
If you were a first-trimester fetus, didn't happen.
The metabolic programming hasn't started yet.
Second, the later part or second to third trimester
is when the programming goes on.
And this was a landmark observation.
This was really important.
Among other things, you get the people
who do not like the notion of these subtle effects.
And they're saying, OK, sure.
This can happen, but this is subtle.
19-fold is not subtle.
And this was the landmark study that
ushered in what is now called a whole field of fetal origins
of adult disease.
Fetal origins of adult disease, which
a lot of realms of medicine think
is outrageous and couldn't possibly work this way.
And it is popping up in more and more domains.
Elevated levels of stress hormones during fetal life,
increased likelihood of anxiety disorders
as an adult, independent of post-natal environment.
Other examples like that, all of these being ones of programming
around that time.
And the Dutch Hunger Winter one is the iconic example.
You know, what we're all accustomed to is yeah,
you study something in, like, a planaria.
And then you study it in a rat.
And you study it in a monkey.
And then you study it in a college freshman.
And finally, when it's-- now, you can conclude something
maybe, maybe about humans.
This was first discovered in this population of humans.
This was no, is this relevant to humans.
Interestingly, there was another population
at the time that went through something or other
like that, which was people in the city of Stalingrad
who were under siege by the Nazis
and had essentially years worth of severe starvation.
They didn't get a Dutch Hunger Winter phenomenon,
because the food coasted off like this.
And afterward, it took years for it
to reach a Western-European average.
You don't get it under those circumstances.
It's a step function like this.
OK.
So think about this now.
So you were a Dutch Hunger Winter fetus.
And as a result, you have a very thrifty metabolism.
And 30 years later, you've gotten pregnant.
You're having a perfectly normal diet,
normal intake of calories.
But you've got this thrifty metabolism.
And as a result, your body is really
good at pulling nutrients out of the bloodstream,
because you secrete more insulin than most people would.
With your thrifty metabolism, you
are pulling a disproportionate share of the calories out
of the bloodstream.
And thus, your fetus is getting a disproportionately smaller
amount of calories.
And thus, your fetus is born with a milder version
of the Dutch Hunger Winter phenomenon.
And this has now been shown in the grandchildren
of Dutch Hunger Winter fetuses.
This is that exact same deal.
This is non-Mendelian, non-genetic transmission
of traits, multigenerationally.
Absolutely astonishing that this could work.
And the biology is all in place for it.
What we will see in a little while is what the mechanism is,
and it's been identified down to the molecular level of what
went on in these Dutch Hunger Winter-- OK, I'll give it away.
Remember that epigenetic business the other day?
There are epigenetic changes in the gene's coding
for things related to insulin in the Dutch Hunger Winter babies.
So enormous effect.
Another example of it, another dietary one,
which is, if you are female-- and female human,
among other species, this has been shown in-- there's
an issue of how much estrogen does your mother consume
when you were a fetus.
Where's estrogen coming from in the diet?
From a lot of different types of plants, phytoestrogens.
And what the studies show is that increased exposure
to estrogen derived from phytoestrogens
during fetal life, and there is a small but consistent
increased risk of estrogen-dependent breast
cancer, 20 years later, 90 years later.
Again, very subtle prenatal environmental effects
playing out forever, even unto the generations after you.
Another realm of prenatal effects, learning.
OK, this sounds ludicrous right off the bat,
that you can have learning prenatally.
You have learning prenatally.
You can show this first in rats.
Here's what you do.
You take a rat fetus, and you can inject into it
a particular flavor of water along with sucrose.
And the fetus absorbs it.
The fetus actually drinks amniotic fluid, which
I find to be deeply creepy.
But nonetheless, you inject this stuff in there.
And you are doing this a number of days running.
And this fetus is now drinking this flavor that
has a lot of sucrose in it.
It tastes good.
It tastes good?
You're a fetus.
What do you mean, it tastes good?
The fetus learns about it.
Because after birth, given a choice
between two neutral flavors, it will
prefer the flavor it was exposed to that it was
drinking when it was a fetus.
How weird is that?
More ones-- more ones?
OK, that was good grammar.
More ones.
Here's one from humans.
And this was a study, which is as strange
as you can get, looking at the fact
that the diaphragm is a very good resonating
membrane, something or other.
Mother's voices are heard in the fetal sack quite readily.
And if I don't know how they got the fiber-optic camera
in there, I have no idea how they got the microphones
in there for recording that.
But it is a very resonant chamber, the diaphragm
and the amniotic fluid.
Fetuses hear a lot of what's going on out there,
most notably mom's voice.
So this was a study, a totally inspired one.
And what you had was, in this one,
pregnant women spent their last trimester
loudly reading either The Cat in the Hat
over and over, like four times a day
or something, until they went mad, absolutely mad--
and that's before the kid was even born--
or reading some random collection of sentences that
controlled for word length, that controlled for rhythmicity,
all of that.
Then, you get the newborn some time later,
and you give them a test of which they prefer to listen to.
How do you do that with a newborn?
Something you can do is, when newborns like something,
they make more sucking motions with their mouth.
So you've got a sucko-meter thing in there measuring it.
And the newborns prefer hearing The Cat in the Hat.
They learned it.
Not a huge effect, but nonetheless,
what is up with that?
Of course, a follow-up question that maybe half the people
in here would be wondering is, well, what about the fathers?
And they have the study with the fathers reading Cat In The Hat
and, you know, like a megaphone on mom's belly and reading.
And it doesn't work.
It doesn't resonate enough that side.
Sounds from the mother.
OK, so what we see here is this whole world of stuff going on
before behavior geneticists show up and say,
environment is just started.
All these prenatal effects of hormones,
nutrition, sensory stimulation, amazing, in some cases,
multigenerational.
Yeah?
Did they catch up with those children later,
The Cat in the Hat children, and see if they
had a tendency to rhyme more?
[LAUGHTER]
Where are they now?
Remarkably, all of them are heads of states of countries.
[LAUGHTER]
People are still trying to understand that one.
But very good follow-ups on that.
So we've got this punch line here, over and over,
showing the power of prenatal effects.
One final study.
And this was one carried out by a scientist at Berkeley named,
Darlene Francis, which took some amazing surgical skills.
So there are different strains of rats
that have been bred for different levels of anxiety.
And we've already heard about one possibility for that.
It turns out some genetic differences
in the promoter to the gene for the benzodiazepine receptor.
There's all sorts of strains that
have been bred for high, low levels of anxiety
that people have studied.
They've been bred.
These are transmissible traits.
These are heritable, these are genetic traits.
Here's what Darlene Francis did, which
was she did an adoption study.
What's the adoption paradigm we've heard already?
Right after birth, you cross-foster the rats,
or the kids get adopted.
That's not the adoption study she did.
She transferred fetuses.
She figured out how to do the surgery
to remove a fetus early on in development from one rat
mom to another rat mom where they developed perfectly
normally, once she had this surgery down.
And you know what turns out to be the case?
It's not a genetic trait.
It was not a genetic trait.
You grew up with the anxiety levels
matching the strain of your mother,
even if the strain of the individual whose body you
fetally developed in-- you take a mom from the high anxiety
strain, and you take a mom from the low anxiety strain.
And you take fetuses from the high anxiety mom,
and they go through gestation in the low anxiety mom.
And as adults, they are low anxiety.
It was not a genetic trait, it was a prenatal one
having to do with another one of those multigenerational
begatting by having early experience influencing
the nature of the pregnancy you would eventually have,
and thus, influencing your fetus,
producing a different pregnancy for them down the line.
This demonstration of cross-fostering,
of adopting, as early as you possibly could,
enormously important study.
One really difficult one.
Yet another wave pounding on this point, environment
does not begin at birth.
And some of the most important environment
is not occurring starting at birth.
And everything about behavior genetics,
classically, was predicated on there's
no environment before that.
OK, so what do they come back with?
What's the response?
We've already seen a possible way
of controlling for that, which is, if you see traits shared
in common with the biological father,
and then you see more traits shared
in common with the biological mother, the increased
degree of sharedness with the mom reflects, not the genes,
because you're getting the same amount of genes
from each parent.
It reflects the prenatal environment.
That would be the control that would be used in these studies.
The extent to which a trait is more
shared with a biological mother than with a biological father
is a reflection of prenatal effects,
because you get the same amount of genes from each parent.
Naturally, this turns out to be vastly messier than this.
Because there's a whole world in which
you're getting more genetic influences from your mother
than from your father.
OK.
First one is, once again, if it turns out
the person who's claiming to be the father isn't actually
the father, that kind of changes the whole map.
And once again, that is a problem
running through all of human behavior genetics literature.
But here, here's the next one.
Here, we have-- just make sure we've got our cliche in place
here-- what is this?
This is the--
OK, which is the what of the cell?
Powerhouse,
The powerhouse.
OK, here we have the powerhouse of the cell, mitochondria.
And in this rather odd cell, there's one mitochondrion,
but it is standing in for all of the powerhouses.
And we've got mitochondria.
Something that, when you first learn about this,
is just flabbergasting, which is, here
you've got a cell with its DNA, and its nucleus,
and its double helix thingy happening there.
And it turns out that mitochondria
have their own DNA.
And this is part of explaining one
of the, like, truly amazing, adventurous, nutty ideas
that have turned out to be true.
Scientist, named Lynn Margulis, University of Massachusetts,
30 years ago or so, she noted that this business
of mitochondria having their own DNA,
and came up with this hypothesis that mitochondria used
to be independent organisms.
That in some symbiotic whatever, billions of years
ago, got into cells that had no mitochrondia at the time,
and that there's been a symbiosis ever since.
Mitochondria have DNA, which are related
to mitochondrial function.
Not a ton of the stuff, nonetheless, you
have every gene that is critical for mitochondrial function.
No, that's not true.
A few of them have wound up in here.
But all of the genes in here are pretty
important for mitochondrial powerhousing,
all that sort of thing.
And these are derived from a completely different world
of DNA than these.
So now consider this.
This cell is an egg.
This cell is not an egg.
This cell is just merely carrying genetic information
that looks like that.
What you've got is sperm, all they are carrying
are the DNAs, the genes, the DNA.
And they don't have cytoplasm, the fluid-y environment
in a cell.
This is one major dense packing job.
Here's the critical implication.
Eggs have mitochondria, sperm don't.
So right at the point of fertilization,
you have gotten all of your mitochondria from your mother.
And thus, all of the genes related
to mitochondrial function that are
contained in the mitochondria you don't get from fathers.
It is exclusively inherited from mothers.
Mitochondrial DNA solely comes from the mother.
So what we've just seen as a first pass
is it's not an even 50/50 split.
You get a disproportionate share of your DNA
coming from the mother.
Really important.
And one that's been used by all sorts
of evolutionary geneticists to trace legacies.
If these mitochondrial DNA is only passed along female lines,
that allows you to figure out all sorts of stuff
about evolution.
It has given rise to the Eve hypothesis, that somewhere back
then was a woman, probably some sort of early hominid,
who is ultimately the ancestor, the great, great, great, great,
great, grandmother of every single human on Earth.
And it can be traced through the mitochondrial DNA.
So that's an asymmetry.
Next one.
Next source of asymmetry is back to that business
about imprinted genes.
From a couple of weeks ago, you remember
that one, genes that are working differently,
depending on which parent you are getting them from.
So that one's a violation as well of this rule
that you get all of your DNA in equal amounts from each parent.
This is another thing that possibly skews the ratio.
Now, here's another very interesting thing.
So you've got the egg here.
And not only does it have this cytoplasm with mitochondria
floating around, but in addition,
there's other stuff floating around in there,
like transcription factors.
Sperm don't have transcription factors.
Sperm, all they're doing is on this, like, suicide swimming
mission there.
And they're not making any new genes.
All they're doing is this one, long spurt
of racing for the end.
And in the case of the eggs, though, you
have transcription factors.
You have all sorts of proteins in the cytoplasm.
You've got a fully functioning cell, instead of this, sort of,
much more streamlined version.
All the transcription factors that come in a fertilized egg
are coming from the mother.
So what does that wind up meaning?
Transcription factors, those are proteins.
We're not talking about genes here.
We just saw how you get more genes
from your mother than your father,
these mitochondrial genes.
OK, but transcription factors, the father
has genes for transcription factors.
The mother has genes for transcription factors.
What's the significance of getting your transcription
factors from your mother in the fertilized egg?
OK.
Consider here two genes.
The first one codes for transcription factor A.
We know that already.
Transcription factors are typically proteins,
so they have their own genes all the way down.
And this codes for gene X, whatever that is.
So here's what you've got.
There are promoters responsive to transcription factor A.
Transcription factor A turns on the synthesis of the protein
coded for by gene X. And in addition,
transcription factor A turns on transcription factor A gene.
It's a positive feedback loop where it makes
more and more of the stuff.
That's the way this particular transcription factor works.
So suppose this is the only thing that
can activate transcription of gene X. So
suppose you've got some environmental event which,
as a result of it, knocks out the activity of transcription
factor X in an egg.
The egg is fertilized.
And as a result of transcription factor A not being expressed,
it doesn't express more.
This is the only thing that drives more expression.
And you never make gene X.
Now, somewhere along the line in your body,
you are soon making eggs which contain these genes,
of course, but where you have never
expressed transcription factor A, because this was knocked out
in the egg.
So because of that, you never express gene X.
And that egg gets fertilized.
And you pass on that trait to your offspring.
You pass that on, this acquired trait of transcription
factor A not working.
If this is the circuitry that you have,
it doesn't matter which version of gene X you get,
you are never going to express that gene for generations
and generations, forever, if this is the loop.
What's going on here, what a lot of people think is relevant,
are some environmental toxins that
are known to disrupt the activity
of certain transcription factors.
And what that does is induce heritability
in a non-genetic way of non-expressing of a gene.
The gene's being inherited, but it will never ever
be expressed.
What have you just acquired?
A Lamarckian trait.
You remember Lamarck.
Everybody learns about Lamarck, in order to mock him viciously.
And Lamarck had the notion that the way evolutionary change
works, the way inheritance works,
is you experience something, and it
causes a change in your body.
And as a result, you pass on that acquired trait
to your offspring.
Ludicrous.
Lamarckians have been mocked and pilloried for centuries,
except in the Soviet Union in the 1930s, where it gave rise
to Lysenkoism, a very horrific piece of genetic history.
But what you've got is this complete trashing
of the notion of you acquire some trait
from the environment, and you pass it on to your offspring.
This is Lamarckian inheritance.
This is an environmental factor that knocks this transcription
factor out of action.
And if this is the wiring that you've got,
this gene will never be expressed.
And as a result, it will never be expressed in your offspring,
in your grandkids, et cetera, all the way down.
This is Lamarckian inheritance of a trait.
And again, where the best evidence for this has been
is with environmental toxins that knock out,
that have some of these mutating effects in eggs.
They are not mutations in a classical DNA sense.
But nonetheless, they are now heritable.
So that pops up also.
So have we got here?
We have the simple assumption that,
if you see more sharing of a trait with the mother
than with the father, that's reflecting
prenatal environment.
And what we've seen here is totally
messing this up is the fact that you do not
get equal genetic influences from each parent.
You are getting more genetic material,
you are getting more genes from your mother,
because the mitochondrial DNA.
Even if you are getting equal amounts of DNA,
expression of them will have different consequences
because of imprinted genes.
Finally, in this world, having nothing
to do with the amount of genes or the actual DNA,
you can have this Lamarckian inheritance
of traits due to environmental perturbations.
What we see here are ways ranging
from extremely subtle and rare to some rather substantial ones
with the mitochondria where you are not getting equivalent
inheritance from both parents.
So that confuses things a lot.
OK.
So after all of that, you do, nonetheless,
get circumstances where behavior is influenced by genes.
And by every rule, it could be shown.
And by the most contemporary of techniques
where people find the gene and the DNA,
and they've traced out the steps in showing that there really
are genetic influences on behavior,
and ones that withstand every single one of these criticisms.
OK.
So sometimes, you've got genes regulating
or genes influencing behavior.
But now we bring in a whole other possibility.
And this is something that was emphasized
by a psychologist named, Judith Rich Harris, a number of years
ago, in a very important book of hers, called The Nurture
Assumption, which has a lot to do with arguing
the relative importance of influences
of peer versus parents.
Nonetheless, she focused in one section
of the book on the genetics of behavior
and focused on what she calls indirect genetic effects.
What would indirect genetic effects be?
OK.
You've got that trait that I referred
to before, one of the most reliable
of traits in the identical twins separated
at birth business, 50% heritability of where
you are on the introversion, extroversion continuum.
OK.
So that one has held up pretty well.
Amid all the possible complaints about these various approaches,
that one appears to be quite solid.
And you're immediately off and running
with, OK, genes for extroversion, for sociality,
for all of that.
What she shows instead is something else is happening.
There's a very, very heritable trait from parent to offspring,
one of the most heritable physical traits out there,
which is your height and your appearance in general,
that those are highly heritable traits.
And suddenly, you have a phenomenon that
is well-documented, which is people
who are taller are treated better and considered
more attractive, comma, he says bitterly.
[LAUGHTER]
What you've got is people are treated differently
along those lines.
And what is known also is, people
who are treated more positively during development,
during childhood, become more extroverted.
What we have here is not heritability of the trait
where you are in the introversion,
extroversion continuum.
What you have is heritability of a physical trait, which
causes you to be treated differently
in the world, which then brings about changes in personality.
And studies have since shown that most
of the heritability of the introversion, extroversion
is mediated by physical traits in between.
So that's a completely indirect way in which
you could have gotten to this.
More cases.
More cases of this.
Let's see.
OK, you can show, in various bird, turkey, hen species,
that there are chicks, that there is heritability of rank.
You could be born to a low-ranking mom
in the pecking order, high-ranking,
all the perfect studies, and controls,
and cross-fostering, all of that,
and there is heritability of rank.
But another indirect genetic effect
that was subsequently demonstrated, which is it's
not the rank that's being inherited,
it's a particular version of genes
related to melanism of your feathers, the color
and iridescence of your feathers.
And it turns out, if you have a certain color pattern, all
the other like roosters, and chicks,
and hens, and poultry, peck at you more often.
And you're reduced to subordination.
This is not inheritance of a social dominant trait
or a social subordination trait.
This is inheritance of a gene having
to do with the color and iridescence of your feathers,
which wind up producing your social rank.
Another example.
Here's another one.
OK, back to chicks again, which is chicks
appear to be intuitively able to peck at grubs shortly
after birth.
That they're able to peck down and get grubs.
And by all the rules of behavior genetics,
with all the constraints and criticisms answered,
this appears to be a heritable trait.
But it turns out that this is not what is heritable.
What is heritable, bizarrely, is the tendency of newborn chicks
to find their toes to be very interesting
and to peck at their toes.
And they quickly learn that this doesn't feel all that great.
But if you do it in somewhat more sloppy of a way,
you get one of these things that's
squirmy that tastes good.
They start off, what is genetic is the tendency
to peck at your feet.
God knows why.
If you are a newborn chick, because
of extremely elegant high technology
studies in which newborn chicks are put in galoshes
or something and they don't pack,
and they don't show the seemingly innate ability to
peck for grubs.
So here, we have a behavioral trait
which, in fact, is indirectly mediated by something else.
More examples.
There is, by now, a literature showing approximately 70%
heritability-- and I keep using this word.
We are going to dissect the word, "heritability" big time
in a short while-- There's about 70%
heritability of political party affiliation in this country.
Sharing that behavioral trait with your parents.
Whoa.
What is that about?
That's sure disturbing.
And that sure makes you want to procreate
in the name of your political stances, or whatever.
And this appears to hold up pretty well
to some of the standard criticisms in the literature.
And it's got nothing to do with this.
What's the mediating variable?
A large really interesting literature
showing, when you compare political or social
progressives with political or social conservatives, one
of the most reliable personality differences
is how they feel about ambiguity.
Conservatives, on the average do not like ambiguity.
They are much more ambiguity-averse.
And you can start it with showing
ambiguous sensory stimuli in kids
and looking at heart rate responses to it.
And that tends to be a stable personality difference
at political extremes.
You will see, some time later on,
that there's a whole world of moral development in kids
where there's various scales measuring.
One's Kohlberg's Stage of Moral Development.
There was an old literature suggesting
political differences as to how fancy of a Kohlberg stage
you got to.
We will see that, despite what struck me
as the intuitive sort of logic of what was found.
That one hasn't held up.
But one that does hold up is difference
in ambiguity tolerance.
And that's probably the mediating trait.
It is not inheriting a tendency to like elephants, or donkeys,
or whatever.
It is instead having this intermediate trait.
Final example of what would be an intermediate trait.
There's a whole bunch of rat and mouse strains
that have been developed that have
differing levels of aggression, high aggression strains.
And you do all the proper controls,
and you can show that this is a genetic trait.
Whoa, heritability of aggression.
We're suddenly back to twin adoption studies and Kety
with heritability of criminality, all of that,
heritability of aggression, what's actually going on
in all of the strains identified to date by spontaneous traits
coming up and then breeding for it.
What you see instead is the strain
that is so aggressive, and so pissy, and so impossible,
and so constrained by the law and order of rodent society,
and all of that.
They've got a lower threshold for pain sensitivity.
Things hurt them more readily.
And they're more likely to become aggressive
at that point.
It turns out it's genetic differences in the neurobiology
of pain sensitivity.
So what we're seeing here, over and over is,
amid the gazillion of criticisms we've
had about when does environment actually start,
and when do environmental assumptions
and being treated the same go down
the tubes, and differential inheritance of genes,
yeah some traits do appear to have some fairly strong
genetic components.
But even once you get that far, they very often
are through some very indirect routes.
OK more things here.
More things?
We just covered that.
OK, a little bit more on epigenetics,
which is that whole business, you
remember, from the other day, which
is after you've got the DNA, and then you
have that whole world of protein coatings, which
I've been very careful not to give the jargony name for,
because it's not important.
But what you've got is this whole world
where regulation is not so much at the level of genes--
and in 95% of the DNA, that's the on/off switches--
but whether the transcription factors can even get in there,
and this world of epigenetic changes
that will cause lifelong differences in how
readily transcription factors get to something or other.
What have you got at that point?
The exact same possibilities as this one here.
If instead of, due to some environmental toxin,
you knock a transcription factor out of business in a fertilized
egg where there's the set up of genes, if for some reason,
whatever, you do not have access to it because
of an epigenetic change, it's going
to be the exact same consequence,
multigenerational inheritance of non-genetic traits
due to epigenetic, rather than genetic differences.
That is turning out to be what went on in the Dutch Hunger
Winter people and the animal models
of epigenetic differences and access of transcription factors
to genes related to insulin metabolism.
That turns out to be a critical one.
Here is one of the coolest examples of this to date.
And this is work done by a guy at McGill University, named
Michael Meaney.
And what he has focused on is what started off
as a very artificial literature, which is,
take yourself a newborn rat, and for the first two weeks
or so of its life, every day, you
pick it up for three minutes and you pet it.
And now, you put it back.
And all else being equal, it will
have a bigger brain in adulthood, better learning
abilities, more resistance to a whole bunch
of neurological insults, lower glucocorticoid levels,
et cetera, that whole world of what
came to be known as neonatal handling.
On the other hand, pick up the rat,
take it away from mom for, instead of 3 minutes,
an hour and a half.
Then each day, put him back.
And as an adult, it's going to have a smaller brain
and a shorter life expectancy.
Three minutes away from mom does wonders.
An hour and a half of being petted does not.
That, in and of itself, is interesting in terms
of what counts as stimulation, what counts as stress.
OK, so hurray.
What we've just learned is just how
generations of rat-petting graduate students
can influence the lineages of rat brains and all of that.
And what Meanie started looking at with this phenomenon
being one that was around forever-- first identified
around 1960 by a guy named Seymour
Levine in the Psychiatry Department here,
and no longer alive-- but that started this whole world
of neonatal handling.
What Meanie did was say, well, rats
did not evolve, whatever is going on here,
for the purpose of doctoral theses,
what's the natural equivalent in the world of a rodent?
And it turns out that what happens when you pick up
a rat for three minutes and do this and put it back,
mom is all excited and goes and checks out the pup
and nestles it, and licks it, and whatever other stuff there.
And it has all this attention.
Whereas, if you take the pup out for an hour and a half,
when you put him back with mom, mom basically
ignores the pup for long periods of time.
You're changing the mother's behavior.
OK, so that's an indirect effect.
And what he proceeded to show was
the critical thing about the handling was not
what you're doing to the rat during that time,
it's the fact that you're causing
dramatic changes in maternal behavior based on that.
So that's interesting.
But that still doesn't solve the problem
of why did the system evolve for grad students
manipulating maternal behavior.
And what he then proceeded to look at
was normal variation in rat mothering styles,
because some rat mothers are-- OK,
I know this is a value judgement--
but some rat mothers are better mothers than other mothers.
Some rat mothers, they simply are better.
They're better.
They're nicer they have better souls.
[LAUGHTER]
And in these rat mothers, how do you determine that
by these sorts of measures?
Licking and grooming.
How much time do you spend licking your baby?
And how much time do you spend grooming your baby?
And what Meanie proceeded to show
is that's what the neonatal handling phenomenon was about.
When you have moms who lick and groom their kids an awful lot,
what you do is produce the same sort of better outcome.
From the three minutes of petting deal there,
you get the kid who is bigger, and healthier,
and smarter, that sort of thing.
Moms who hardly ever lick and groom their pups,
they produce pups that, as adults,
are like the ones that were separated
for an hour and a half a day.
It is a reflection of mothering style
in the rats and the variability there.
Next thing he showed was that this was multigenerational.
If you lick and groom your baby rat daughter a whole lot,
as an adult, she will be more of a licker and groomer.
And he's already shown what some of the neurological mechanisms
are for that.
For development, what have we got?
Yet again, one of these non-Mendelian inheritance
of traits deals going on.
In this case, not even prenatal.
Your early experience is going to cause lifelong changes
in your brain, which will make you more
likely to reproduce the same early experience
for your offspring.
Off you go.
The final thing he did, which stands
as a landmark in the field of behavioral neurobiology,
is he figured out what the epigenetic change is.
One of them, or rather two of them
is identified by now, what gets changed
by how mom often or un-often licks you,
grooms you, all of that?
You change the access of transcription factors
relevant to activating genes for making receptors
for stress hormones, making receptors for estrogen,
making receptors for a whole bunch of different hormones.
Showing the epigenetic changes there,
that's how you go from moms differing maternal style
to lifelong differences in expression
of all sorts of genes.
How's this?
What you wind up seeing there as this permanent mechanism,
it is also reversible, what he has since shown,
which is you have a baby rat who spends
the first half of its infancy with some totally
terrible, negligent, distracted mom who pays no attention
and doesn't do any licking.
Now cross-foster the pup to a more attentive mother,
and you can change the epigenetic pattern.
So all of this has two themes going on.
Early experience, causing really persistent differences
in how this stuff works long after,
and experience later on having the potential to reverse
some of this.
All of this stuff, once again, would be mistaken for genetic.
What we have here is what appears
to be a genetic style of what sort of mother rat you are.
And it's not genes, it's the mothering style
setting up the offspring for being a similar type of mother.
Incredibly important studies demonstrating this.
What remains unclear is how you get
from mom licking you to something epigenetic happening
here.
His crew is pounding away at that.
OK, so what have we got at this point?
We have gone through over and over here--
where have we gotten to at this point?
We've gone over and over here at all of the classical techniques
in the field of behavior genetics,
does it run in families, adoptive studies,
identical versus monozygotic twins,
twins separated at birth.
We saw all of the problems with it.
And most dramatically, most excitingly these days,
prenatal environmental effects.
We saw that trying to separate maternal prenatal effects
from paternal genetic effects hits
a wall, when you get all of these weird-o hereditary
things, including potentially non-genetic Lamarckian
inheritance of a trait.
And what we've seen is how this stuff playing out early in life
has multigenerational consequences.
What we're going to pick up with on Wednesday
is now looking at how people in this business
find the actual genes, and ultimately, gene environment
interactions that make the last two hours basically irrelevant.
OK.
 Something incredibly cool I just found out about yesterday,
which, oh, I wish I had known about two days ago,
but still, it's useful.
You remember those Siberian foxes and that amazing thing?
You breed them for tameness, purely on a behavioral trait,
and come back 30 generations later,
and they look like puppies.
They have the short muzzles, and the big roundy eyes,
and the cute ears, and they wag their tails
and all of that, punchline there being, number one,
evolution can move really fast.
Number two in some interesting, mysterious way,
if you are selecting for certain behavioral traits--
in this case, one where you like being around humans
and are all cuddly with them-- what you're also going
to select for are a whole bunch of traits
that are associated with baby wolves in terms
of physical appearance.
Turns out, there's a flip side of this going on right now
with what are known as metro dogs, which are dogs that live
in the subway system in Moscow.
And I don't know, but they live in there,
and a whole deal was made out of the number of them which
get on subways and know which stops they're going to.
And there's an entire website devoted
to metro dogs, which are in Russian,
but it has lots of nice pictures.
But what they're seeing there is that these
are dogs who, essentially, have been feral
and in feral packs for decades and decades.
And what have they been being selected for?
Being able to scrounge, being, in fact, quite scared
of humans, a lot of the time staying far from them
whenever possible because they are raiding garbage
cans, who knows what.
And what they're seeing in the metro dogs
is about 30 generations into it now,
their tails are looking more like the tails
you see on wolves.
Their muzzles are getting longer.
Their coat patterns are beginning
to get less fancy and distinctive from all
the different strains of dogs.
These guys are being selected for the exact same traits that
went into being wolves.
It's a really interesting demonstration.
Again, these guys are not surviving because they've
got a different-shaped tail.
It's just part of the package.
If you were going to have this canine-like thing
and be selected for being scared of humans,
functioning in packs, having a fairly aggressive temperament,
you're going to wind up looking like a wolf after a while.
Same deal, again, very rapidly.
So unexpectedly, Russia turns out
to be the motherland of all sorts of interesting things
with puppies and puppies in the past and puppies in the future
and all of that, so that's wonderful.
OK.
However, I don't have any pictures of them
that I've brought today, but go to www.metrodog.edu
and see what they have to say.
OK, so picking up on Monday's lecture,
I recognize Monday's lecture was probably the first one
officially to be able to blow half
of you guys out of the water because it
was really tough material.
Not only was it, as promised, yet another disciplinary jump,
but it was the first wave at a lot of material
that went by fairly fast, and a lot of it quite subtle.
What are the things to focus on in there?
What did we cover Monday that's critical?
Behavior genetics as an overall approach
is not doing the constructing an evolutionary story.
Who's got the best story?
We win.
It's not molecular genetics looking
at evolutionary change driven by actual mutations
down at the molecular level.
Instead, it's looking for patterns of behavior
that go along with relatedness.
What we saw was-- the most completely useless version was,
well, here's a trait that runs in a family,
and it runs in the family more the more related
the individuals are-- completely useless, bringing
in the first of the problems that we're
going to have nonstop in the subject,
ruling out different environments.
We saw a number of the classic approaches
they have, which is studying monozygotic
versus dizygotic twins, studying adopted individuals,
or studying the gold standard of identical twins separated
at birth, adopted, and then brought back together again.
And in each one of those cases, that's
explaining some degree of the confusion, eliminating some
of the environment, but over, and over, and over again,
this problem of environments are sneaking in all sorts
of interesting ways.
Adoption is nonrandom in terms of where placement occurs.
All sorts of stuff like that-- making it harder to tell.
What we then transitioned to was dealing
with the most interesting realm of environment,
having influences, which is this whole world
of prenatal environment and environmental effects there,
one version of it being this whole new field,
fetal origins of adult disease, the fact that early events--
fetal environmental events-- can have lifelong consequences,
even multigenerational, as we saw.
And people are understanding the nuts and bolts
of how that might work, that epigenetic stuff.
So we saw that as one-- a very subtle realm
of environment slipping in.
And we also saw examples where "environment" could
be occurring within an hour of birth,
and where environment is occurring
despite seemingly like similar things, like the number of math
classes you take-- environment being very critical.
What we also saw, just to make life a whole lot messier
and more complicated, was violating
the rule we have all known since infancy,
which is you get equal genetic input from each parent.
The business about mitochondria coming from your mother--
the business about, as we saw, more subtle version--
the same equal input of genes, perhaps,
but the regulatory control is much more
coming from the mother by way of the transcription factors,
all of that and the cytosol of the egg,
sperm having nothing interesting going on from a cell biology
level, the egg having all of this.
And where you can even get something as nutty
as inheritance of an acquired trait, Lamarckian evolution.
OK, so that was plowing through all of that,
and I'm fairly certain that reviewing the last two
hours in these last three minutes
has not put anybody back in the water who
was blown out of the water.
So go to sections-- this is difficult material,
and it's going to get worse today.
OK, this is hard material.
Make sure you read the extended notes because there's
a fighting chance that will be more coherent than the lecture.
OK, so we got to the point last time
around of seeing that, OK, prenatal effects--
the last thing we focused on was the actual nuts and bolts
of it, epigenetics, all of that.
Now we transition to what became the much more modern, exciting
version of behavior genetics, unless you happen
to have yourself hundreds of pairs
of identical twins separated at birth, which
is to go and actually find the gene, finally beginning
to bring together-- to marry the classical behavior
genetics approaches with molecular biology.
And it was starting around the '80s
or so that people began to be able to work
in actual molecular techniques into this whole field,
and it started off in a very primitive way
and has gotten much better since then.
The version that you can start off with
is you know something about the trait,
or as we're really saying here, you
know something about that there are differences
in the trait among different individuals,
and now you go looking for the gene.
How do you do that?
The first classical way of doing that
is that you actually have an observable difference
in two individuals, in two populations,
in two branches of the same family,
a difference in an external manifestation of what's
going on with genes, a difference
in phenotype-- appearance, behavior, some such thing.
And what you then do is you use that approach
to try to then find genetic differences.
You get a whole bunch of examples
of folks with one version, a whole bunch of folks
with another version, and you start looking
for where the differences are.
Slightly more constrained version,
you don't actually have the phenotype.
You are not looking at eye color.
You are not looking at how wrinkly somebody's face is.
You are not looking at behavioral traits.
You're not looking at anything external.
The next more focused step is now,
you're looking at proteins, what some proteins do.
Here is some enzyme that turns this into that,
and there's two different ways the enzyme can do it
or two different variants on it.
And now, we've got this bunch of people
where we take their blood and look,
and they've got this variant.
These guys have this version of how the protein goes
about its business.
Can we find the genetic difference?
Next step down, next step more frustrating--
when you can't see external differences
that you're tracking.
There is no phenotypic difference
that you've got to work with, where
you don't know what the protein does, what its function is.
Next, lower rent version is to look at the same protein that
comes in slightly different sizes
because that's usually a hint that there
are different functions.
The way the protein works is going to differ,
and somewhere along the way there,
you came up with one version by having
some insertion, mutation, or deletion, or some such thing.
You don't know what the protein does,
and you certainly don't know what
that does in terms of the individual's appearance,
behavior phenotype, but at least you've got something
to work with there.
So what it is you are using as your starting point-- easiest
external signs.
Next is what would be called intermediate physiological
endpoints.
Intermediate-- it's something functional,
but it's not functional like how the person functions.
It's functional like how an individual protein functions.
And then, if you're up the creek with that, at least
hopefully going for differences in the size of the protein,
the electrical charge of the protein.
For non-chemistry types, how this version of the protein
interacts with a water environment
versus how that version-- you don't
know what the protein does, but at least
you've got something to work with.
You got a difference.
In all of these cases, the strategy
is to then see what are the gene differences that
go along with it?
Primitive initial version would be as follows.
You've got, for example-- in this case,
you were trying to find the gene for some disease.
And this is where the whole field
started because it is a lot easier to go after a disease.
Either you have it or you don't if you
pick the right kind of awful disease,
rather than going on a phenotype like television taste.
That one's going to be a lot harder to find the gene for.
The whole field started instead looking at extremes of really
major league, you-got-it-or-you-don't-have-it
diseases.
So you've got this family that has this disease running
in the family-- PKU, phenylketonuria, for example,
or Huntington's disease, or cystic fibrosis.
These were some of the first ones to go.
And what you now do is you've got the big family,
and what you want ideally is a big huge family where about
half the people have the disease and half don't.
And the initial way the whole approach would be done
was you get blood samples from everybody there,
and you start sifting through everybody's DNA,
and you're looking for a stretch of DNA
that everybody with a disease has in common
and that none of the relatives without the disease have.
And what you've got at that point
is what would be called a genetic marker because doing
it this way, you're just sifting through a haystack.
You're just trying to pick up big, crude patterns.
The difference that you wind up seeing between these two
populations of relatives almost certainly-- in fact,
as far as I know, never once with this approach
had you just found the individual gene.
You found a stretch of DNA that's
got 10, 20, 30 genes in there.
But somewhere in that stretch is the interesting one.
So at least you have a genetic marker here.
You know the genetic neighborhood
where the difference occurs.
So this was at one point cutting edge,
a technique called RFLP, restriction fragment link
polymorphisms.
Do not write that down.
And this technique was incredibly
slick at some point early on, and it is not easily done
because you are dumping 20,000 puzzle pieces over here
and 20,000 there, and you're looking
for the one difference between the two
that's otherwise identical.
It's that sort of task.
Nonetheless, using that approach,
people began to get disease markers
where they got the stretch of DNA that contained
a whole bunch of genes and who knows what else,
but at least the candidate gene, the gene
that was floating around that was
responsible for this disease, was somewhere
in the stretch of DNA.
At that point, what would be done is a number of things.
First is people would obsessively, obsessively check
their statistics to see just how certain they are that this
is the genetic marker for this disease
because you were soon going to be advising people
whether to terminate pregnancies based
on genetic tests like those.
This is an area where more stringent rules were imposed
before you announce you think you know how the universe works
with respect to this disease.
Really, really major room for things
going wrong in terms of it being then applied clinically,
so first big demand would be you really
have to be much more certain-- a much more demanding field
than lots of others in biology.
The next issue would be this bioethics problem,
which is you've got somebody from one
of these families who may or may not have the disease.
This is a disease that doesn't get you until age whatever,
and you're younger than that, and this immediately
exploded this whole issue for the first time.
Should people get tested if they have
the genetic marker for that disease,
if they are a candidate for it?
And this opened up a whole world of confusion
about this, where a key feature of these debates
was the fact that you haven't gotten the gene.
You've just gotten the candidate stretch of DNA,
and there remains a very small statistical chance
that you've got the wrong one.
For a bunch of reasons, there is that possibility.
So do you let somebody take a test?
Can people tell the difference between a yes and no
and a statistical probability?
What do you do if it's a disease where the person has just spent
their last 10 years watching their parents
slowly die from it, and there's no cure for it,
and it's absolutely horrible?
Do you give them a test that is-- if the bad outcome is
going to throw them off the top of a building
with a high likelihood?
Enormously complex bioethics issue.
The third challenge, though, was to step up the science
from just having the stretch of DNA
with a bunch of genes in there to actually find the gene.
And in the years since, the molecular biology has gotten
much, much better at moving past finding a genetic marker,
we are 99.9% certain that the gene that's relevant
is somewhere in this stretch, to finding the actual gene
and then being able to see what's
the difference in it between them and them.
What's the difference, down to base pairs?
Where is the mutation?
Where's the difference coming from?
That's the world of sequencing genomes now.
That's where the field is at.
So that has been enormously powerful in terms
of potentially finding one single gene.
But everything that came through in the molecular lectures
last week should be pointing out there's
not a whole lot going on in there
that revolves around one single gene at a time.
So hold on to really horrible diseases.
Yeah, one gene, single mutation, but most of what
goes wrong, if you want to start understanding
the genetics of psychiatric disorders, of diabetes,
of early-- of late-onset dementias, things of that sort,
it's not going to be just one gene.
So the next huge advance in the field
was being able to do searches like these for multiple genes.
One thing that has been used is a technique called
microarrays, gene microarrays.
And they were basically invented here on campus by a guy
over in the med school named Pat Brown, who is already
very famous for having done this and I
suspect has all sorts of interesting awards coming
for him down the line.
This spectacular technique-- you take what is now called a gene
chip, and through techniques that are absolutely boggling
and make me feel queasy, what you somehow manage to do
is you get all the copies of RNA that
could be made in a cell from this individual.
If you are completely new to this
and you've managed to get in this far
without having to think about what RNA is, ignore it.
This is just sort of a subtle detail for people
who are interested in this.
What you do is you get a copy of each type
of RNA made in a cell.
You force the cell basically to transcribe all of the genes
it has.
And then you get this little chip,
and you basically glue the end of each one of these RNAs
to it, and you will have a chip with 20,000
of these little things.
And then you use probes which will
allow you to see which versions of 20,000 of those genes
are different in this individual from that individual.
Total boggling, has forced an entire new world
of trying to analyze data, this new field of informatics
because you're not looking at one gene at a time.
You're looking at patterns, and that becomes a lot harder.
That becomes incredibly important
because, again, it's all sorts of the interesting stuff where
it's not going to be one gene.
It's a dozen.
It's 100.
So that has been one challenging approach.
Another is a technique called QTLs, quantitative trait
lowside.
What that basically is built around--
that if you have subtle enough of tests, you could figure out
this is a complex trait that is modulated by two genes,
or by three, or by 17.
You can see all of this going in the direction
from techniques that would let you know
you're kind of in the neighborhood of a gene,
to actually identifying a gene that differs between the two
populations, to the much more useful realistic world
of whole bunches of genes, networks going on at a time.
So using these approaches, people
have made lots of progress.
The most recent version of that--
I mentioned the other day there, one type
of mutation, a macro mutation, is this business
about variants of major stretches of DNA copy length
variance, where a whole stretch of DNA
is duplicated twice or eleventy different times.
Can you identify traits that are occurring
because of differences in the number of copies?
Yet another version of dealing with
this whole hierarchical, multi-level business about gene
regulation.
OK, take home message from this is 20,
30 years ago when all of this started,
you can start with a trait, and through increasingly fancier
techniques, you could find the neighborhood of where
the gene is that the different versions of the gene
correspond to the different versions of the trait-- moving
from patterns of that to the neighborhood of the genes
to the actual gene to whole bunches of genes
to macro differences there, that's one approach.
The other approach of the field has
been starting the other way.
You've got a gene.
You've got a gene, and thanks to researching it
in flies, and worms, and rats, and all of that,
you kind of have a sense of what the gene does,
and you have a reasonable guess of what sort of traits
might be relevant in a human, and now you
run it the other way.
You have two different versions of the gene,
and you look for differences in behavior,
or differences in protein function,
or differences in the size of the protein.
You start with the genetic knowledge.
And for our purposes, where people are mostly looking
is at behavioral end points.
So what do you see with that?
Lots of findings in recent years, and my feeling
is this is one of the more interesting ways of doing
this behavior genetics-- starting
with basic research with animals.
You've got some sense of what the gene does.
How about it in people?
Because there is variability.
First example, and this has to do with a really interesting
hormone that we will hear plenty about down the line,
a hormone called vasopressin.
And vasopressin in rodents I think I already discussed.
Vasopressin in rodents has a receptor, the vasopressin
receptor.
And what we talked about the other week is depending
on which version of this you have,
if you happen to be a vole male, it
will determine whether or not you
were monogamous or polygamous.
That's interesting.
What was also interesting was that difference-- the two
variants were not in the gene itself but in the promoter,
and that winds up meaning that the promoter caused in one
strain the gene to be expressed in different parts of the brain
than in the other version of it.
OK, so what we saw there was all sorts of hints from the animal
world that vasopressin has stuff to do with social affiliation,
things of that sort.
So what do you now do if you want to apply
this knowledge to humans?
The first thing you need to ask is, well,
do we know where the gene is in humans?
And with modern sequencing in the human genome,
you've got it, so you know where the gene is for the vasopressin
receptor.
And the next thing you have to ask
is, does it come in two different flavors?
Does it come in two different flavors,
and do they differ in the same way
as the ones people have studied endlessly in rodents?
Yay.
Yes, indeed, the receptor gene is exactly the same
in everyone, but there's two different versions
of the promoter-- the same exact story.
So that's great.
If you've gotten that far, now you
start looking for what the differences are
between people who have one variant versus the other.
And you've got to do your homework.
You got to match them for age, and gender, and number
of cavities, and all sorts of stuff like that.
And when you've got that under control,
you go looking for behaviors.
What's the limit of this?
By definition, you're only looking where
the light is shining already.
You're only looking where you already
have a sense that maybe you should be looking,
unless you're totally crazy-obsessive
and want to try to measure everything possible in people
and look for a difference.
In most of these studies, you kind of know where to look.
That immediately means there's all sorts
of areas you're not looking.
Nonetheless, with this approach, people
have gone looking in humans at these different variants
on the vasopressin receptor gene,
and you find some really interesting differences.
One was a paper published a couple years ago
in a very prestigious journal, which
got picked up in the papers all over the universe,
showing if you have the version of the promoter
that you find in monogamous male voles, you as a human male
are likely to have more stable relationships than if you
have the other version of it.
Whoa.
That's pretty bizarre.
That's pretty cool.
Next thing, a study that just came out
in that same prestigious journal a couple of weeks ago,
and this is one we're showing, which,
depending on which version you have, how good are you
reading facial expressions in other people?
Subtle differences in facial expressions--
then, there's a whole other world of approaching,
evidence emerging that in families where autism runs
majorly through the families, people are seeing mutations
in genes related to vasopressin and the vasopressin receptor.
So this is one really cool example
of starting with that approach, and this
is a gene whose variants have something
to do with some pretty meaningful realms
of human social connectiveness, variability stuff.
Totally interesting.
Another example-- this is a gene coding for a protein
called BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor.
Doesn't really matter.
The main point of BDNF is it prompts neurons
into growing new processes.
And it turns out, BDNF does something that ultimately
is kind of a drag for you.
In one part of the brain, the amygdala,
which-- I think I've already mentioned the amygdala
has a lot to do with fear and anxiety and that sort of thing,
and we will come back to that.
Don't panic.
But the main thing is BDNF plays a role in causing individuals--
individual rats-- when they are highly stressed to make
the neurons in the amygdala grow new connections, new processes.
What are you doing?
You are training that rat to be anxious.
You are training that rat to be hyper-responsive
to scary things.
BDNF appears to play this role.
So now, the next step in this sequence-- and you'll
begin to see it's the same pattern over and over-- people
then found, ah, there's a couple of different flavors of BDNF.
There are a couple of different genetic variants.
There's a couple of different ways
in which BDNF pops up in rats or mice or whatever,
differing by a base pair here, an amino acid there,
where you then do your scutwork and show, OK,
this BDNF works faster than that version of it or it works less
but it lasts longer, or who knows what.
You find a functional difference.
There's a genetic difference.
There's two different versions of it,
and it actually makes a difference
for how the protein functions.
And this has all been studied in animals,
and now you understand what it's doing in the amygdala of a rat,
depending on which version you have.
And then the exact same strategy--
go look at the BDNF gene in humans and ask, well,
do you see the same difference?
Are the same two flavors in humans
popping up as in rodents?
Yes, indeed.
And then, the exact same approach again,
looking for differences, and you know where to start looking.
What has that literature been showing?
The type of BDNF variant that you
have in the exact same way that it maps in rodents maps
onto your likelihood of an anxiety disorder,
the levels of stress hormones in your bloodstream,
the levels of metabolic activity in your amygdala,
the same exact sort of finding.
Next, a whole other world, which we will learn
much more about down the line.
This is obviously a quick survey of a whole bunch
of different areas.
All of these we will come back to big time
later on in the course.
Next area, this neurotransmitter,
dopamine-- you will learn amazing amounts about dopamine.
Dopamine, which works through a-- you
guessed it-- dopamine receptor-- and in fact, there
is a gazillion different types of dopamine receptors.
And dopamine receptor number four,
D4, the dopamine receptor four gene
has something to do with a whole bunch of interesting traits
in rodents.
And it comes with variability in the rodent versions,
different flavors, and humans have variability
along similar lines.
And dopamine-- what is dopamine involved in?
Pleasure, and anticipation, and reward-seeking behavior.
What two different versions of the dopamine type
four, the D4 receptor gene, begin to map onto in humans?
Levels of risk-taking behavior, levels of sensation seeking,
levels of novelty craving.
That's interesting.
Another example, a gene called NPY-- a protein,
a neurotransmitter called neuropeptide Y. Do not get
overwhelmed by all of these.
It's just the same pattern over and over.
NPY, same deal again-- and two different human variants
have something to do with differences in levels,
again, of anxiety, of metabolic rates in the amygdala,
all of that.
And in this case, the NPY difference
is quite interesting because it's
one of those where the difference is not
in the gene structure sequence.
It's once again a difference in the promoter.
OK, so what have we have in all of these?
This is a really powerful approach.
The first version that we heard, you've
got a behavioral difference.
You've got a phenotypic difference.
You've got a difference in how two proteins function,
or their size.
Go looking for what's the genetic difference between
those who have this trait and those who don't.
This version, reverse engineering it,
you start off with a gene that comes in different flavors.
You got a sense of what it does from animal studies.
Do you have the same variation in humans,
and does it map onto behavior?
So all of these are amazing.
All of these, it has to be emphasized
in a way that will come back to haunt us also
big time-- all of these explain tiny percentages
of the variability in the data.
There is nothing remotely resembling
a world in which if you have flavor
vanilla of the D4 receptor versus if you have flavor
chocolate-- if you have flavor vanilla,
you are going to be hand gliding when you are in preschool.
You're going to be totally sensation seeking.
And if you have the other version,
you're going to spend your entire life collecting
stamps or who knows what.
It's not that deterministic.
No surprise with this gene stuff.
No single gene is going to be particularly deterministic
once you get outside the world of phenylketonuria
and cystic fibrosis and such.
They contribute some explanatory power.
So on one hand, amazingly cool, seeing these genetic links
to aspects of human behavior.
On the other hand, they're not very big effects,
and this is something we will come back
to endlessly down the line.
OK, so this is how the field has gone about more recently trying
to find links between variation in genes or their promoters
and variations in aspect of behavior, running it both ways.
And what all of this is looking at,
what is intrinsic in everything we've
been talking about with this behavior genetics,
is oh, my God, the cliche finally emerges.
Nature and nurture, and gene and environment,
and gene/environment interactions--
what is becoming increasingly clear in the field
is there's a third leg to all of this.
There's a third leg that could be extremely powerful
and is going to be the basis for the chaos and complexity
lectures down the line, which is chance,
the role of random events, the role
of chance in being a form that transcends what we would call
environment and is certainly not genetics,
a whole different world where that contributes.
OK, where will we see chance playing out an important role
in all of this?
Brownian motion-- for those who don't have a techie background,
I will describe it in the way that I understand it,
which is flailing desperately.
Brownian motion has to do with the fact that molecules
oscillate and use an intrinsic movement, oscillation,
of molecules.
You take a whatever full of water
filled with all sorts of things-- molecules, whatever--
and they're all going to be vibrating
to a certain extent because of this Brownian motion.
I suspect that was the most amazingly incorrect description
of what Brownian motion is, but that's the point.
That's the main point, simply that there is this oscillation,
which is completely random.
It is just an intrinsic feature of how
the world of physics and Albert Einstein's mustache works.
And so you've got this Brownian motion stuff going on.
So where might that play out in terms of chance?
So we got here a cell with our four powerhouses of the cell
here.
And on the right-- let's assume this is a genetically identical
cell, and I just got tired of drawing it completely--
but the same four mitochondria.
And what we see here first off is genetically,
these mitochondria differ.
One of them has a blue spot.
One of them has a red sweater.
Wait a second.
Every single cell in your body was built out
of the same genome when you started off life.
Ah-ha.
Back to that thing the other day.
Mitochondria have their own DNA.
Mitochondria are going about their own business
of dividing in the cell, of replicating
their-- replicating themselves now and then with a mutation.
Within any given cell, the mitochondrial sequence of DNA
is going to differ from one mitochondria to another
because they've been separate organisms that
are inside a cell going about their own evolution,
their own mutations, their own whatever.
What you then have-- what would be
called a mosaic of different genetic profiles
of the mitochondria within a cell.
So that in and of itself is pretty interesting
because this is a whole other world.
This is not the DNA back in the nucleus,
and this is not variability introduced
by jumping genes or accessibility of transcription
factors to genes, all that.
This is-- meanwhile, outside the nucleus,
there's this whole weirdo world of these mitochondria that
are functioning all on their own,
so the different mitochondria in the same cell
will have different genetic makeups.
So great.
So these two cells are absolutely identical.
Each of them have four mitochondria, and each of them
have two red kinds, one blue kind,
and one that gets nothing.
So now that cell is going to go about splitting in two.
And what happens is it splits.
And in the process of splitting, what the fluid, the cytosol,
the stuff inside where all the molecules-- including
the mitochondria in the other organelles-- are found.
And it splits, and there winds up
being a very simple question.
Which mitochondria wind up in which daughter cell?
And what we've got here is in this case, a split like that.
In this case, a split like that.
Oh my god, why did that happen?
Is that because there is a gene in this one that
says when you form a new pair of cells, have blue and blank
in one and two reds in the other?
And this one is a completely different instruction manual
for how you split cells.
No, simple randomness of where the mitochondria were
in the cell when they split.
A totally random event.
So what you see here is you start off
with two cells that are genetically identical.
And within one round of cell splitting,
these genetically identical individuals
are already genetically different.
How come?
Because of instructions or a blueprint?
No.
Simply because molecules, organelles,
things like mitochondria just oscillating around.
And along comes a split, and who is stuck on which side
of the divide.
So you've got variability that way.
Intrinsic in that is another type of variability, which
the second I mention it, you will
be able to run with effortlessly,
which is floating around in here also
will be transcription factors, and splicing enzymes,
and other enzymes.
And along comes the split.
And there is not the remotest chance
that half of every single type of transcription factor
is going to go each way, and half of every type of splicing
enzyme, et cetera.
It's going to be who's oscillating where
and where the cells splits.
So you wind up not only with different outcomes
in terms of mitochondria and their genetic makeup,
you're going to have different distributions
of different types of transcription factors.
All due to this random oscillatory stuff.
So that's one big component where chance plays a role.
And what the chaos complexity lectures
are going to be very heavily about
is just how important stuff like this
is, how important it is in explaining what goes on,
how important it is in explaining why, no matter
how much you know about what every single molecule is having
for lunch next Tuesday, there's still
going to be a huge degree of unpredictability.
All of that is to come.
This is just beginning to establish the idea yes, nature,
nurture, nature, nurture.
Chance also is the third leg in there playing a large role.
Whether chance is what's going on when
you get a transposable event-- you remember at the point
that neural stem cells are beginning to divide
into neurons.
That's when they juggle around their transposable genes
most dramatically.
Whether that is a completely random event as to where
the copies land when they come back to Earth,
I'm not sure if people know.
But I suspect there's an element of chance in there also.
So this is introducing that notion in there.
So great.
So now you've got all these caviats,
which is environment is subtle and coming
all over the place, and early experience,
and epigenetic changes, and all the different ways you could
find genes linked to behavior.
And don't forget, variability also
has something to do with chance.
At the end of the day though, what
all of the behavior genetic approach
is going to come down to at the end is a single number.
We have studied this trait with adoption techniques,
with looking for genetic markers,
with looking for copy length variance.
We have studied this trait and the variability of it.
And thanks to us studying for a gazillion years,
we can now conclude that 53.5% percent of the variability
in this trait is heritable.
You come up with this number at the end.
This trait has a 53% heritability.
That's the number that winds up coming out.
Scientists report that this or that trait
has variability as 80% heritability.
This is the number that always comes out at the end.
What's the heritability?
Ranging somewhere from 0% up to 100%.
This is heritability.
And this is absolutely critical.
Because this is a truly influential number.
The one that people come away with when
they are being taught, Oh, this trait is genetic.
Those who want to be quantitative
will have been told, Whoa this trait has 80% heritability.
It has 90% heritability, all of that.
And it's the wrong interpretation.
And what we're going to spend a bunch of time on now
is looking at what heritability actually means.
The heritability number-- because it
is completely different from the everyday intuition
about what it means.
And what it's usually telling you
is how unimportant genes are in the deterministic way rather
than the other way around.
OK.
So what does everyone assume?
What is heritability telling you?
It is telling you how much do genes
determine the average level of this trait.
You have one version of a gene, and there's the other flavor.
And they produce different average levels of some behavior
or something at the end.
What heritability is teaching you,
if you've got this completely wrong notion,
it's teaching you how much do genes
have to do with the average level of that behavior,
that trait, that whatever.
That's not what heritability actually means.
What heritability as a number is telling
you is not what genes have to do with the average level
of the trait, it's what genes have
to do with the degree of variability
around that average.
This is a point where things immediately
seem panicky and start getting very, very complicated,
all of that.
We will see it's not that bad.
And it's not that bad in a very critical way.
OK, simple first sense of getting at it.
Here's two populations where you measure something or other.
And these three individuals, they come in at nine, 10, 11.
And these come in at one, 10, and 19, or whatever.
What's going on here?
You average them.
They have the exact same average.
What's the difference?
There's a lot more variability around the average
here than in this case.
What's the wrong idea that people
have that heritability means?
It's telling you how much do genes
determine the average here.
That's not what it's doing.
It's how much do genes determine how much variability there is.
Initially, this seems like a very subtle point.
And what's the big deal?
Because at the end of the day, it's
still talking about how important genes are.
What we'll see now is it's actually
a way of seeing how less deterministic genes are
in lots of cases.
So this heritability stuff, talking about variants.
Here we have an example.
We've got some plant.
Some plant with some gene that comes
in three different flavors.
And you measure something or other about the plant.
This is how much water it retains,
or of the plant's IQ, or something like that.
You're measuring some trait, and you're asking,
Does it differ as a function of which version of this gene
you have?
So you do your study, and this is what you see.
And you say, Whoa, OK.
I went and looked at this plant in a rain forest,
and we identified the genetic versions of it.
And look-- very different.
The gene that you have there, knowing that,
gives you a lot of predictive power
over what level of whatever it is that you're
measuring this plant is.
That's great.
So you're going to get your doctorate out of that,
and you get some publications.
And it's great, and you finally stop being a student.
And it's terrific.
And meanwhile, some individual who
shares like none of your genes in common
on the other side of the planet, meanwhile
there are some S-O-B who's studying the exact same plant
in the middle of the Gobi Desert.
You're sitting here in the Amazon studying this,
and here's this individual doing the exact same kind
of experiment, saying, Oh, here we
have this unlikely plant that grows both in the Amazon
and the Gobi Desert.
But here we have this, and we're studying this here.
And what am I studying?
I'm studying those three variants.
Those three variants of this gene.
And I'm asking do they influence plant IQ?
The same thing that you were asking over here.
And that individual was doing their study,
and they see that yes, indeed, the gene influences
what version that you have.
And here you had A, B, and C. And here's
what they see when they measure plant IQ.
And it looks like that.
And what do they conclude?
Whoa, look at that.
Knowing what version of the gene you
have gives me enormous predictive power
in predicting what the plant IQ is going to be.
And then catastrophically, tragically, the two of you
meet each other and discover that you're both
researching the same plant.
And you look at your numbers, and your heart
breaks at that point.
Because you look at these, and what's going on here?
What's going on?
Let's translate this notion of heritability,
and variance, and all of that.
Let's translate it into a very simple question
you can ask, translating all of this in English.
You're interested in what this gene has to do with plant IQ.
And you're allowed to find out one piece of information.
You could know whether the plant has version A, B, or C,
or you could know whether the plant is
growing in the Amazon or the Gobi Desert.
Which piece of information is going to give you
more predictive power?
And what you wind up seeing here is if you can either
know this or the environment, you
want to know what the environment is.
The variability-- plant IQ could come in at 98, 100, 102, eight,
10, and 12.
Far more of the variability in those six numbers
is explained by what environment it's
going on in rather than the genetic difference.
That's what heritability is telling you.
And in a study like this, it would tell you
that the heritability number is actually quite low.
Because the amount of variation due to this is far less
explained by the gene type than whether it's
the Amazon or the Gobi Desert.
So that's a first pass at it.
Why is this really important?
For the following reason.
You're a scientist, and you are trying
to understand how A, B, and C influence plant IQ.
And you come up with something nutty and stupid
like saying, Well, I would like to be
able to do field seasons in both the Amazon and the Gobi Desert.
And your advisor will say, or all of your elders
will say something like, No, you can't do that.
Because that's just-- you're not controlling for environment.
You're not studying it in only one controlled environment.
You can't go to-- they're such different ecosystems,
all of that.
Pick one and go study it there.
And what you do is you go study it there.
And as a result of just studying it here,
you come away thinking that virtually
all of the variability is explained by genes.
What have you just done?
You explicitly have designed your experiment
so that you can't detect the environmental role
in determining that trait.
What counts as setting up the experiment as the right way
for people who think about this sort of thing,
standard sort of approaches to experiment,
what counts as doing a good job by definition, what you're
doing is biasing towards thinking the genetic input
is more important than it actually is.
Because scientists don't decide to study this trait
in two different places.
You don't decide to do a study where
you're looking at some trait in both rats and ocelots,
or something.
Look, pick one species.
Maybe even pick just one gender.
Pick one environment.
Don't have your rats in one room where the air conditioning is
going nonstop and the other room you're barbecuing stuff.
Control for environment.
And by definition, if you've done
the nice, careful, responsible thing
that a scientist's supposed to do doing this sort of thing,
you control for environment.
What have you just done?
You have just removed your ability
to see the role of environment.
And you have just artificially inflated how important
you think the genes are.
OK, let's take a five minute break.
We are going to look at this in a lot more detail.
Do not freak out if this is not immediately intuitively
obvious.
Questions that just came up.
The first one is pointing out one
of those where I probably should have actually taught
something clearer.
What are you talking about with proteins being different sizes?
How do you figure out proteins are different sizes?
And the answer is you make them stand
against the wall in their bedroom with a ruler,
and you mark it there.
And then you see if they differ in size.
Or if that doesn't work, what you do is you
use various biochemical techniques.
You basically make something akin
to a thick, homogeneous soup of something or other.
And you put the two different versions of the protein
in there, and essentially you sit and wait
and see how far they sink down.
And the one that's heavier is going to sink down further.
Anyone who knowns about gels and the electrophoresis,
that's insanely simplified.
But that's basically the notion of it.
Put them where they move through something
as a function of their weight, gravity,
and you could then pick up size differences.
The other good question that was asked
is, What did you just say in the last 10 minutes?
This is very difficult. This is an extremely subtle point.
And I'm going to hammer it in over, and over,
again here, in sections, all of that.
Why is it so important?
Because number one, this is a number, heritability,
that the general lay public comes away
with interpreting incompletely wrongly.
And number two, the vast majority of scientists,
when they're working in this field of behavior genetics,
design their experiments so that by definition, they
are eliminating all sorts of realms
of environmental influences.
So going back to this here.
So here we see once again this simple question.
Use this one over and over translating all this theory
in variation and stuff.
Always translates into the same question.
I can find out what type, what version of this gene,
or I can find out which environment this is happening.
Which one do I want to know if I want to be in a better position
to guess what's going on?
And when it looks like this, you don't want to know the genes.
You want to know the environment because it's far more powerful.
And if you only studied this in this setting,
you would come away saying, Oh, this variability
is entirely explained by which version of the gene.
Oh, this trait, plant IQ, has 100% heritability.
And what you see there is when you combine it together
with numbers like these, it's 15% heritability.
So that's totally critical to hammer in.
So what are some of the responses at that point
by people who will say, That's ridiculous.
If you're saying what heritability mostly
should be teaching us is how unpowerful genes are,
what would be one of the initial responses?
Great.
How many plants out there are growing in both the Amazon
and the Gobi Desert.
And it's so hard to study IQ in plants.
This is a totally artificial dichotomy between the extremes
of environment.
You're like inflating things now.
You're cheating in the other direction
to get the most dramatic artificial circumstances
to inflate your sense of how important environment is.
This is totally artificially dichotomized.
So think about humans, and think about one single fact, which
is we inhabit more different environments
than any other species on Earth.
We live in the Amazon, and we live in the Gobi Desert.
And we live in Peoria, and we live in all these things.
And we have more exposure to different sorts
of environments.
So immediately, that argument goes down the drain.
OK.
So now instead, somebody argues something different,
saying OK, sometimes plants have IQ in the Amazon
and in the Gobi Desert.
And I get your point, your stupid point here
that ooh, environment can make-- No one's going
to argue that the difference between the Amazon and the Gobi
Desert isn't important.
Oh, yeah, OK.
Well, humans, they live in both, all of that.
It's not an artificial difference.
But you notice something?
Isn't it interesting that in these two
different environments, C plants always have the highest IQ,
and A plants always have the lowest.
That's telling us something about that gene.
That's telling us, and you're then saying well, yes, yes, it
differs by environment.
But we've just learned something very important about these gene
versions.
Which is, in totally different environments,
version C gives you a higher plant IQ.
So that's important.
Yeah, yeah, environment.
But we've just seen how powerful this gene is.
But then you run into the person at the conference who
is studying it in the Gobi desert,
and they put their data up and it's
even worse than in the last version
because it looks like this.
And what have you just learned?
That you can't say a thing about this gene.
You have just learned the translation of this sentence.
The first critical sentence we've had
over and over is, if you can only
know one factoid, one about which gene
version or what environment, choose the environment,
we have now just learned a second sentence.
A second question to ask.
Which is, what does having A, B, or C have to do with plant IQ?
And if the answer is "it depends,"
you've just seen this subtlety.
If the answer is, "it depends on which environment
you're looking at." if you're looking in the Amazon,
C gets you the best plant IQ.
if you're looking in the Gobi desert,
C gets you the worst plant IQ.
What have you just shown?
What is technically the definition of a gene
environment interaction?
And we've just seen going from, well yeah, yeah,
they're very different, but C is always the best.
Isn't that interesting?
To a completely different profile.
What does A, B, or C have to do with plant IQ?
It depends.
It depends on the environment.
That's how you've just defined, that's your diagnosis,
for gene environment interaction.
And what ultimately one has to argue
is that it is impossible to ever say what a gene does.
You can only say what a gene does in the environments which
to date it has been studied in.
OK, let's see that expanding even more.
Because you've got this-- OK, let's jump ahead.
OK, so this is showing you now just how totally nutty
and counter-intuitive heritability terms actually
are.
You ask a question.
What's the heritability of number of fingers on your hand?
You know, genes have to do with the fact
that we've got five fingers instead of flippers,
or some such thing.
Genes have huge amounts to do with it.
You're not asking about the average number of fingers,
you're asking about the variability.
Remember that again.
So what are the circumstances out there
which will give somebody six fingers instead of five?
That's incredibly rare.
What about four fingers instead of five?
Oh, industrial accidents.
Three fingers instead of five?
Lots of industrial accidents.
Two?
Change jobs or whatever.
What are we seeing here in terms of,
how much do genes have to do with having fewer
than five fingers?
It's all industrial accidents.
Genes have nothing to do with it.
There's no doubt some weirdo disease out there.
But for our purposes, this is how it works.
What have we just discovered?
Number of fingers, that trait has a 0% heritability.
That's totally bizarre.
That's completely counter-intuitive.
Genes have everything to do with why the average human has
five fingers, but they have nothing
to do with the variability.
In that case, it's entirely environmental.
The number of fingers you have has 0% heritability.
Now let's look at another example.
It's 1950 in Eisenhower America.
Actually, it wasn't until 1952.
But it's a very different world than now.
And one of the things that you would never ever, ever, never,
never, ever see in the United States
would be some guy wearing an earring.
Unless in a very cloistered part of the country
he was a sensitive guy.
But for most of America, this is not what men do.
They do not wear earrings.
And likewise, in most of America,
if you were a good red-blooded American woman,
you would not go outside without your earrings on.
So now you've got to say OK, well
what causes variability in earring wearing behavior?
And it's entirely explained by whether you are female or male,
which is a genetic trait.
What we've just seen is, whether or not
you wear earrings in 1952 has 100% heritability.
Totally counter-intuitive.
Think through this again and again and again,
because this makes sense.
When heritability is a number about this rather than this,
you get a world where 0% heritability
for your number of fingers and 100%
heritability for whether you are wearing earrings at that time.
Because once again, asking OK, I've
got a choice in the matter.
I can either know the entire genome of this individual,
or I can know whether they are in a frat where
they close their eyes and work with a wood saw every now
and then.
Which fact do I want to know?
That's the one that will tell me what about the environment
going on with them.
Or now you have a choice.
I can either know the entire genome of this person,
or I can know that what sort of environment
they're living in 1952.
What do you want to know there is, male or female.
If I know that, I can completely predict this behavior
of earring wearing.
So this totally counter-intuitive thing here,
where heritability is telling just the opposite of what
people intuitively think.
And as soon as you deal with that
and recognize that and recognize the way scientists do
experiments, is to try to do things
as cleanly as possible-- study it only in one place,
in only one setting, only one circumstance-- you have just
artificially guaranteed that you're
going to come away more impressed with the genes
than they actually deserve to be.
So how would this look?
Beginning now in more detail.
So what we've got here are a number of different ways
in which you can see when are genes important, when
are environment important, that sort of thing.
OK, so we have here two different traits-- no,
we have one trait, two different flavors of a gene.
Flavors A and B. And three different environments.
So here you have the Amazon, the Gobi Desert,
and a roller coaster.
And you're measuring plant IQ.
And there's two different versions of the gene there.
And you're asking well, what does
gene, what to environment have to do with it?
Your data look like this.
What does it tell you?
Environment makes no difference at all.
It doesn't matter if you are in the desert, the rainforest,
whatever.
Which version of the gene you have entirely
explains variability.
So this is what a heritability of like 100% would look like.
Now you do the study, and instead you
get data like these.
You'll note just one of the most important things
about being a card carrying scientist, which
is data are plural.
Which, talk about counter-intuitive,
earrings are genetic and data are plural.
So now you get these data and you see as follows.
In this environment, no difference depending
on what type of gene you have.
In this environment, no difference, no difference.
In each environment, very different averages.
Ah, this is what it would look like with 0% heritability.
There is no difference at all of the variation explained
by gene variation.
It's all environmental.
So now we have a version that forces
us to put in the same phrase we heard about before.
This is what your data look like now.
And you now ask the question, well,
what does being in environment-- what does your environment have
to do with your plant IQ?
And the answer is, it depends on which version of the gene
you have.
And now you ask, what does having
a certain version of the gene have to do with your plant IQ?
And the answer is, it depends on which environment you're in.
This is, in a sense, the verbal definition, again, of a gene
environment interaction.
What do genes have to do with this trait?
Depends on the environment.
What does environment have to do with a trait?
It depends on the type of genes.
This is what the data would look like.
And here you have an interaction.
And in some fudging of the numbers,
this is what 50% heritability would look like.
What we just saw here before, our hypothetical example
of the messiest it could get, this
is the one where the people come back and say, yes, yes, yes,
environment matters.
But you notice version C is always
associated with the highest IQ.
And here we have the version where
depending on the setting, if you have this type of gene,
it gets better.
If you have this type of gene, it gets worse.
This is one where there's a dramatic interaction
between what the genes are doing and what
the environment is doing.
This is one that's going to have an even lower heritability
because this is one where you are saying big time,
it depends.
It depends on what the gene type is.
It depends.
It depends on what the environment is.
This is, in a sense, as dramatically
as it could be that case.
So you constantly have stuff like this going on.
Let's look at an example where, in fact, you wind up
seeing something like this.
Back to our iconic mutation disease from the other day
there, PKU.
Phenylketonuria.
Just to remind you, do not worry about the details.
It's this disease where normally there's this thing in your body
which would be toxic to your brain
unless it's turned into something else.
And this is the enzyme-- the protein,
and thus coded for by a gene-- this
is the enzyme that turns the scary version
into the safe version.
And in PKU, you have a mutation in this enzyme,
it's not doing its job.
The scary version builds up and wipes out your nervous system.
That looks bad.
And what we've got now is a trait where you're
going to say, well, let's see.
I am very interested in knowing, being
able to predict whether or not this person has a fairly normal
looking brain or whether it looks like Swiss cheese.
Do I want to know whether or not they're growing up
in Idaho versus Montana?
Or do I want to know whether or not they've
got a mutation in this enzyme?
Obviously, you want to know if there's
a mutation in the enzyme.
Seemingly, heritability is 100%.
But now you do something which people
have been doing for people with PKU for a couple of decades
now.
Which is, you put little labels on bottles of food and stuff
saying, if this food contains the scary bad news thing.
And if you have PKU, if you simply
don't eat food that contains that-- if you have what's
called a fennel alanine free diet--
you don't get your brain looking like Swiss cheese.
What have you got there?
You've just put in an environmental influence
that has reduced heritability down to zero.
This is a case where we've got something like this looking.
And here we're measuring is, like, the Swiss cheese index,
or whatever of the brain.
And what we've got here is, this is an environment where people
know how much of the stuff there is in different types of food
and don't eat it.
A simple environmental-- not so simple--
but an environmental intervention.
A behavioral change in the environment.
And you've just reduced heritability from 100% to 0%.
So that is a dramatic version.
Now, let's look at a version of a real life example of this.
This would be with-- I think I've already put this one up.
OK, does this work familiar by now?
No.
OK, that was at Thanksgiving.
OK.
What we've got here is a gene that's got something
to do with depression.
It's a gene that has something to do with neurotransmitter
serotonin.
Details don't matter, they will come later.
But the gene comes in two different flavors.
And one version of it, based on everything
that's known from laboratory animals,
one version should be the kind that predisposes
you more towards depression.
So, in this incredibly important study
that was done a number of years ago,
a guy named Caspi, Duke University, and colleagues,
they had been studying 17,000 people basically from birth
up to age 25 or so in New Zealand.
And who knows why in New Zealand,
but studying them there, and following and asking.
They took blood so they know the whole genetic profiles.
And looking at, among other things, by age 25,
does the person have major depression or not.
Have they had an episode of depression.
And now let's go look at which version of this gene they have.
And what would everything predict from all the animal
studies, which is you have the bad version of the gene
and you're, as a human, going to have a higher
chance of having a depression.
That's not what the data looked like.
Instead, it was one of those "it depends."
It depends on the environment.
What you saw was, it all depended
on how many major childhood stressors there were.
Loss of a parent, divorce, abuse, some such thing.
And the absence of any of those, this
was the rate of depression in the people having
the good version.
And throw in one childhood trauma, two of them,
three of them, and the incidence is going up slightly.
Now, you've got the bad version of the gene.
And it puts you more at risk only
in certain types of environments.
So here we have a great gene environment interaction.
That's something straight out of this one.
You're saying well, what does this gene
have to do with the risk of depression?
And the answer is, it depends.
It depends on what your childhood environment was like.
But now, one additional detail showing that this is actually
a case of this.
One that just gets ignored whenever
people talk about the study because it's cool,
but it's actually not all that important.
OK, so here's the people with the good version of the gene,
but it makes this point though.
You've got the good version, and they're down here.
And you know what's going to happen,
the bad version is going to be exactly the same.
But you look at the data closely, and in the absence,
the bad version is actually a little bit protective
from depression versus the quote "good version."
What have you just discovered there?
It's one of these.
This is a radical gene environment interaction.
Not only is it the case that, does this put you more at risk?
Well, that depends on the environment.
Depending on your environment, it could put you less at risk.
This one is not a big deal because there's
a tiny difference.
There's no reason to pay attention
to it, other than just sort of pointing it out pedagogically.
But this is an amazing example where this can
go in the opposite direction.
This is a hugely important gene environment interaction.
So what all of this begins to set you up for is,
you've forgot this heritability number.
And people come away constantly thinking about,
it's telling you about how much the average level of a trait
is determined by genes.
It's instead telling you how much the variability.
What that means, thus, by definition, that there's
all sorts of nutty counter-intuitive things going
on, where earrings are totally heritable and number of fingers
are not.
What that tells you is, by definition, the way experiments
are set up to make things nice and clean and interpretable,
scientists typically remove environmental variability.
Scientists typically artificially
have boosted up the seeming heritability of a trait.
What does that tell you?
The more different environments you study a trait in,
the lower the heritability is going to be.
Because you are going to be getting
more and more opportunities for things to be different.
More opportunities to be able to say, it depends.
It depends on which environment.
We've just studied it in 99 different environments,
and it always looks like this.
No difference by environment, and genes
always make a huge difference.
And then you go out and, before dying of fatigue,
you study it in the hundredth environment,
and it now looks like this sort of thing.
What you've just learned is, this is a "it depends" example.
And the more environments you study something in,
the lower heritability is going to be.
Translating that into English, the more environments
you study a genetically influenced trait,
the less interesting and important
the genes are going to be.
The less interesting and important
they're going to be in answering,
what does this gene have to do with whatever?
And what we're seeing over and over again
is, the only way to answer it over and over again
is, it's going to be an "it depends."
It depends on the environment.
Ultimately-- as I said a little while ago-- ultimately,
it winds up being meaningless to ask what a gene does.
Ultimately, the only really truly scientific way
you can answer a question like that
is, what does this gene do in this particular environment?
People make this big deal out of oh, genes do something,
environments do something.
And every now and then, hooray, they
interact in some exciting way in teaching the gene environment
interaction cliche, that's what's
happening every single time.
And that winds up being the basis of that
quote from Paul Ehrlich in this department
that I put on the handout, which is great,
summarizes this entire point, asking whether genes
or environment have more to do with some trait
is akin to asking whether height or length have more
to do with the volume of a rectangle.
They're inseparable.
There is no such thing as a gene influence
outside the context of an environmental interaction.
OK.
Let's look more at what this looks like.
Here, this being one great example.
And this being this iconic one.
And this is a finding that is destined to be, like,
the most important in the last quarter
century in biological psychiatry.
It is the most powerful demonstration
in the realm of abnormal human behavior of what your genotype
has to do with your behavior.
The most amazing, logical, intuitively reasonable
demonstration of "it depends."
It depends on how stressful the childhood environment was.
Really great.
Bringing things back to last weeks
sort of molecular lectures, people already
know who study this.
The two different versions of the gene, certain classes
of stress hormones interact with the two versions differently.
When stress hormone levels aren't particularly raised,
that difference isn't being manifested.
The more of a history of stress-- and it's
obviously more mechanical, more complicated
than just how much you're exposed to-- but the promoters,
the variation here is in the promoters.
The promoters interact differently
with those glucocorticoid stress hormones.
In the absence of the glucocorticoid stress hormones,
because in the absence of something exciting,
your genetic difference makes no difference.
So we've just translated an epidemiological answer--
what does this gene have to do with depression?
It depends.
It depends on your childhood stress history.
We've just translated that into last week's molecular biology,
what does this genetic variance have to do with whether or not
you have depression?
It depends.
It depends on how much childhood exposure to glucocorticoids
you had.
So we've just leaped from analyzing this
in the context of this field, to translating that
into last week.
And translating that into the endocrine
lectures that are going to come next week, beginning to show,
OK, you're an epidemiologist.
The answer is, what sort of environment?
You're an endocrinologist.
The answer is, well, the hormonal environment.
Whether you define it, it's the same punch line.
It depends.
It depends on the environment.
So this is the best, most amazing example
of this in all of psychiatry.
Except, these guys-- Caspian colleagues--
measured something else and they got just
as bestest of an answer for that.
Which is, they looked at another gene that has variation.
One we will hear about down the line.
A gene called MAO, monoamine oxidase.
All we need to know right now is, a gazillion animal studies
suggest that one version of the gene
predisposes more towards aggression than the other.
Whoa.
So they've got 17,000 people who've
just had 25 years worth of opportunity
to be aggressive or not, and they got the genes.
And now they ask the question, rather than at age 25,
has this person ever had a major clinical depression?
Now they ask, at age 25, has this person ever
been in trouble with the law for some sort
of antisocial behavior?
Antisocial behavior is the new jargon
for what used to be called sociopathic behavior.
Has this person been in trouble with the law
for sociopathic behavior, anti-social.
And does it vary depending on which version of the MAO gene
you have?
And what you get is, not only is the answer
"it depends," the graph is basically
identical to this one.
It's superimposable, the magnitude of the effect.
What was this in that case?
Whether or not you had, and how severe your child history was,
of abuse.
The more childhood abuse you had, the more
having the wrong version of the gene
increased your odds of having anti-social aggressive
behavior.
Once again, a major dramatic "it depends."
And it's stunning.
You look at these two different papers,
both were published in "Science" a couple years apart.
Landmark studies, all of that.
And the two graphs really are virtually superimposable.
The same magnitude of effects.
The same answer.
It depends on your childhood.
So that is a very strong example.
Next one, another one, now you go back to this gene difference
with the serotonin, the depression world.
And now you study it in monkeys and the variation there,
there is a variation in brain chemistry related
to depression, all of that depending
on how stressful the monkey's childhood was.
Same exact sort of finding.
What else?
Now when you begin to look at-- going back
to that world of dopamine receptors and thrill
seeking and all of that-- and what you look at
there is variability in a certain type
of different dopamine receptor gene.
And what you find there is, if you
have a certain version of that gene,
you have less social attachment.
There's a whole psychology of how you measure that.
And God knows why.
It's associated with less social attachment
if, and only if, you got brought up
by a mother who was cold and withdrawn.
There is once again a "it depends."
My looking at that, it's nowhere near as clean as this.
But it's the same sort of theme again.
Another example of it.
There's another gene called FAD2.
And don't even ask me what it stands for.
But which version of the gene you have
has some predictability over your IQ.
That's kind of interesting.
It's not a big effect, but nonetheless it is demonstrable.
Which version of the gene you have has some control,
but there's a "it depends."
Which version of that gene you have
has something to do with IQ if and only if something.
Let me tell you what this FAD2 is involved in.
It is involved in carbohydrate metabolism.
Carbohydrates-- carbs, carbohydrate metabolism-- it
codes for some enzyme that breaks down
carbohydrates and no doubt, some certain kind.
OK.
What's going on here?
You've got two different versions
of a gene that break down carbohydrates,
and you've got one version.
And on the average, you'll have a higher IQ if and only
if some environmental thing was happening.
Any guesses what that environmental thing might be?
High carbohydrate diet.
High carbohydrate diet, OK.
That makes tons of sense, yes indeed.
That winds up being relevant.
Remember, you're now-- not remember,
because I didn't say it already--
but you're looking at IQ in kids.
So you're looking now at carbohydrate stuff
going on early in life.
So frame it in that context.
So, we've got a start of an answer here.
So what else could be happening?
If and only if the version you have
of this gene that's involved in breaking down carbohydrates,
translating into how you're dealing
with the amount of carbohydrates in your diet,
gets you a different IQ with an if and only if.
What would the if and only if be?
Build on that comment there.
What else could it be?
OK, I'm not even going to look.
Somebody shout out an answer.
[INAUDIBLE]
You're right!
OK, Who started?
Somebody started saying something.
Who started saying something?
OK.
Any other ideas?
Breast feeding.
Who said that?
Look at that, they start pointing.
The person doesn't even fess up.
Who said that?
It's in your notes.
You're right.
[LAUGHTER]
OK.
You want to be that way.
I'm out of here.
OK.
So if and only if you read the damn notes, as it turns out.
Yes!
Breastfeeding.
OK.
If and only if you were having a particular type of diet
very early in life that is extremely
rich in the types of carbohydrates
that this enzyme works on.
So a very dramatic if and only if there.
I don't know why I write that stuff.
I don't know why I show up here.
I should be doing one or the other
and some sort of environment interaction thing.
So yeah, breastfeeding.
OK.
So one more example, a very interesting one.
And this is one that has at some point or other, I'd bet,
been pertinent to every single person in this room.
Which is, there's another genetic difference
that has something to do with a certain cognitive aptitude.
And this one everybody knows about.
And this one is as follows.
If you have-- there's two different versions of this sort
of genetic picture and they're associated
with different levels of aptitude
in this particular cognitive realm--
this is not a world any more of one single gene at a time.
FAD2, any of these.
This instead is talking about a whole bunch of genes.
If you have a Y chromosome or not.
If you are male or female.
A genetic trait.
And what is the thing that has been demonstrated
most consistently in the literature
forever and ever and ever in terms
of a gender difference in a cognitive skill in math
performance.
That has come through endlessly.
I've already talked about it the other week.
A small difference in the average median performance
on junior high school old Johns Hopkins
superstar kids taking the SATs.
But a big difference in the tail at the end, high performance,
all of that.
This comes up in endless, endless studies.
This comes up with kids at fairly young ages.
There is this gender difference on the average-- yes, we're
saying on the average, don't forget, you say on the average
before you even ignore that-- you say on the average,
boys are better at math than girls.
Men are better at math than women.
Male plants in the Gobi desert are better
in math than female plants there.
And so we've got a genetic trait here
being a function of whether or not you get a Y chromosome.
But then, a few years ago there was an astonishingly important
paper published in "Science."
And what these people did was look at math performance
scores-- of I think it was 480,000 different high school
kids.
And all over the world.
They didn't just study it in America.
They studied it in 40 different countries.
And they asked a very simple question.
Which is, are there big differences in gender quality
of life issues in this country?
And there is a whole index that comes out of the World Health
UN something or other called a gender equality index.
Which takes into account, like, if there is--
and if there is, how dramatic of-- a gender
difference in educational opportunities,
in freedom of movement, in freedom to serve in an elected
office, and freedom to vote, in freedom to choose who you're
married to, and obviously the enormous variability
on this planet in terms of that.
And what they showed was, the greater the inadequacies,
the greater the difference in gender treatment
in the society across 40 different countries,
the bigger the difference there was in math scores.
It's not a function of gender, it's
which society you're growing up with your gender.
What was at the most extreme?
Let me make sure I get the countries right here.
Who had the worst profiles of the 40 countries
in terms of the biggest gender differences in these quality
of life measures?
Turkey, Tunisia, and South Korea.
Where was the United States?
Sitting somewhere around the middle
with most Western European countries.
And which were the countries on earth which, as a block,
had the lowest degree of different treatment of people
in their society based on gender?
The ever handy wonderful Utopian Scandinavians.
So in comes the Scandinavians.
And what you show is, by the time
you look at the country on Earth that has the least gender
differentiation of any, which is Iceland,
you notice something different.
There still is a gender difference.
In Iceland, girls are better at math than boys, slightly.
A small difference going on there.
But nonetheless, as you go from the countries in which
from day one, girls transitioning into women
are given the most constraints of freedom
of life, that's where you're going to see the biggest math
difference scores.
And you look at less and less of those sort of inequities.
And the gender difference in the math score,
by the time it's at the Scandinavian countries,
it's down to zero.
And then you get to Iceland, and it actually reverses.
It's got nothing to do with your Y chromosome.
We immediately come back to the first
of those questions from before, that diagnostic question.
You've got a choice.
You want to have a sense of, in this population-- nah,
even at the individual level.
You've got a choice.
You're comparing two individuals,
and you want to guess which one is
better at math than the other.
You can either know their gender,
or you could know whether they grew up in Tunisia or Iceland.
Which fact do you want to know?
You want to know about environment.
Environment is vastly more powerful there.
Another feature of that that has been interesting.
So you then say OK, the extremes.
OK, so in some societies, the means are exactly the same.
But what about that difference way out at the highest
level of performance.
As I mentioned the other day, in the mid-1980s,
looking at the highest first percentile of math performance
on junior high school kids with their SATs,
and there was a 13:1 ratio of males to females in there.
When it was last studied a few years ago,
it's down to a 3:1 ratio.
Oh, that's obviously due to evolution over the last 20
years, because it's got to be due to genes.
That's like saying genes explain the fact that in 1980s people,
like, wore pads on their shoulders
and, like, power sneakers to work or whatever.
And the fact that nobody does that anymore
shows that the gene for wearing that on your woman executive
decor deal has evolved.
That's asinine.
You do not go from 13:1 to 3:1 with a trait
in 20 years in a highly interbreeding
mixed population-- in other words, humans--
and have this as a genetic trait.
Even function at the extreme has squat
to do with the genetics of gender.
It's, I want to know what society the person got
raised in.
I could care less what their chromosome is.
If I want to know how good they're
likely to be at math compared to the other person,
tell me where they grew up.
That's the most important thing to know.
Interesting additional thing.
The second most reliable finding in all of measures
of cognitive aptitude thing that has a gender difference
is, on the average, girls being better at verbal performance
tasks than boys.
Women than men, all that sort of thing.
So what's going on in those 40 different countries there?
What you wind up seeing is, it depends on which country
you're in.
It depends on that gender equality index.
And what you see is, in the worst countries there,
by these measures, Tunisia-- who else was it?-- Tunisia, Turkey,
and South Korea, what you see is, yeah,
women get better scores on verbal tests than men.
And as you go to the more equal places,
the gender difference increases.
In other words, you've got one of these.
The more gender equal a society is,
the less of a sex difference there is in math capabilities
and the bigger the advantage is for females over males
in verbal performance.
It's got everything to do with what society you're in.
This gender difference in this realm of cognitive skills
means next to nothing.
And if I had any technological skills--
I kept saying I was going to bring
the figure from this paper, I'll have
it posted-- because this one figure,
it's across all these-- you just look at it
and there's the answer.
It's got nothing to do with the genetics of gender difference.
OK, so what else would one want to emphasize here?
OK, what else would one want to emphasize here?
Which is, this is a total mess and totally complicated.
OK what have we gotten to so far in this field of behavior
genetics?
There's all these different ancient ways
of inferring something.
Twins, adoption, there's the much more modern way, which
is finding the actual genes.
That's wonderful.
That's exciting.
Nonetheless, over and over and over,
an environment gets understudied.
Environment is far more subtle than you think.
Environment starts earlier in life than you think.
And when you do it in a very formal quantitative way,
analyzing what genetic influences are about,
you discover that scientists study things
under circumstances where you constantly underestimate
the importance of environment.
Blah, blah, etc., etc.
But at the end of the day, don't genes
have something to do with something or other
going on with this?
And obviously, obviously they have some very important roles.
You have genes that completely determine aspects of behavior.
Single genes that completely determine your intelligence
if you are a housefly.
Lots of interesting studies there showing
single gene determination, a lot of these behaviors.
And it doesn't matter sort of what the economic opportunities
are for houseflies in that country versus humans.
What you see there is yeah, there
are realms of behavioral biology where genes
play very, very strong roles.
And we will certainly see some of them
in the lectures to come.
But with two qualifiers.
The first one we heard the other day.
Which is, even when, with all of these criticisms on board
and you've got every critical tool
to slice up anybody arguing that here's
a high heritability important genetic component, blah, blah,
etc.
You've completely cut it to pieces,
and there still is a gene that seems
to be doing something important for trait X. What we heard
about the other day is, nonetheless, think about
if there is an indirect genetic route for getting there.
Is there a gene for extroversion?
Or is there a gene for your height
and how people of your height are treated?
Is there a gene for picking at grubs?
Or is there a gene for if you're really tall, you pick at grubs
and people don't make fun of you.
Is all of that business about indirect genetic effects?
So even when you see a gene for something,
you have to begin to ask to make sure that you are not,
in fact, looking at an indirect effect.
Final qualifier.
When you look at the really interesting genes
in terms of what they do.
When you look at some of the ones
that have the most to do, say, with what
differentiates our genome from the chimp genome.
When you look at things like juggling your DNA just when
you're making new neurons, what you see over and over is,
what human genes are about most dramatically
is coding for ways in which you have freedom
from the effects of genetics.
And that is going to be a theme endlessly in the lectures
to come.
OK.
 But before doing that, various bits of feedback
from office hours.
Hearing from TAs.
Getting a sense of where the grand, gaping craters
of confusion are so far.
And apparently an awful lot of them
were provided in the last two days of lectures
with behavior genetics.
Various issues that came up.
Clearly, one of the most complicated, inaccessible,
subtle, pain in the neck concepts
in the whole class, which is this heritability business.
So memorize the following two sentences,
because it all comes down to the difference between something
that is inherited and how heritable a trait is.
The fact that humans overwhelmingly
have five fingers reflects the fact that the number of fingers
is an inherited trait.
The fact that, when there are some circumstances of humans
having other than five fingers, it
is overwhelmingly due to environmental
something-or-others is an indication of the fact
that, nonetheless, variability around the number of fingers--
heritability is essentially 0%.
So get those two sorted out, and you
have those two concepts all under your belt
and very useful.
Why is it useful?
First off, why is this one useful?
Because it is important to know the distinction.
Everybody, for one thing, out there
tends to view these as telling the same thing.
And insofar as they think it says the same thing,
they think that both terms are referring to this.
Something that is genetically regulated, genetically
determined-- whatever.
Two totally different terms.
So one reason to obsess over this
is that when the newspapers give us
our sound bite of "scientists report that,"
it's usually this one that they're reporting,
with one of those marvelously misleading numbers.
Which then sets people up for thinking they have just
been told how much do genes "determine"
some average feature of this trait.
So, important to tell them apart.
The other reason of getting this sorted out
is not to only unlearn the nonsense aspects
and misinterpreting this term but because understanding
that term gives you a lot of insights
into when and how you are getting
gene-environment interactions.
Caveat with that.
Saying "when and how you're getting"--
you're always getting gene-environment interactions.
Remember the quote from the other day.
It's like saying, which contributes
more to the volume of a square, or the height, or the length,
or the roundiness, or whatever?
Yes, it's always gene-environment interactions.
Saying, in what ways are there some
of the more interesting ones, dramatic ones, in what realms--
Understand this, and you avoid this confusion.
Understand this, and it gives you
insights into gene-environment interactions.
OK.
Other issues that are coming up.
By now, we've looked at three different broad approaches
to the biology of social behavior.
The evolutionary stuff-- broadly stated-- the molecular,
the behavior genetics.
And what should be clear by now is
if you were living inside one of those buckets,
you hate each of the other two and trash them entirely.
So we get to the first of our great, conflicting points,
which is, does that mean one of these is wrong?
No, one of them is not wrong.
None of them are wrong.
Some are more right than others, and some
are a lot better than others.
But nonetheless, these are all-- again,
from the very first lecture-- different levels
of description.
Another way to begin to think about this, in terms
of what we've now been focusing on--
and this sort of coming up from some questions afterward.
So by now we've had the term "epigenetics."
That's come in in the last couple of lectures.
And there are at least three different levels,
three different buckets, with which you can define the term.
What is epigenetics?
Epigenetics is the way the culture, environment--
all of that-- affects biology.
That's a certain broad way of stating that.
NodA stated that way, you are making
biology synonymous with genetics, which ain't so.
But nonetheless, that's a certain broad level
of stating it.
In another discipline, a very sort
of first pass at molecular stuff,
what is epigenetics about?
It's the way in which environments turns genes
on and off.
And at another level of explanation, more reductive,
what is epigenetics about?
It is regulation of chromatin remodeling and methylation
of genes and all of that.
Do not panic, if that's not the level
you want to know it about.
That's the business from the other day,
about changing access of transcription factors
to DNA-- jargony way of doing it.
Don't worry.
The main point being that this is a completely different level
of defining this.
This is the whole point in here.
We are beginning to see different disciplinary
approaches.
We are beginning to see where one discipline has decided
they have answered a question.
This is how culture affects biology?
Give me a break.
Show me which genes we're talking about!
We're talking about genes, here.
Give me a break.
Show me-- is this chromatin remodeling-- what's
the mechanism for it?
How reversible is it?
One discipline's answer is the next one's starting point--
blah, blah.
One discipline's wonderfully satisfying scientific answer
is the basis for the next discipline
to be totally contemptuous of them.
You call that science?
This is sort of the whole point, here,
beginning to see how we could chip out a way between these.
More bits of clarification.
Amid that, one of the things that really came through
is-- in the sort of ratio of praising
to trashing-- I was clearly spending a lot of the last two
days trashing the behavior-genetics approaches.
So a little bit of clarification, there.
First off, we can broadly divide what
came the last two days into classical behavior genetics.
And that's the comparing monozygotic and dizygotic
twins.
That's the adoption studies, that's
the twins adopted at birth-- that's all of those approaches,
there.
Those are all the ones where you were just inferring really
indirectly that there's something genetically going
on there.
The other half, and much more sort of the modern behavior
genetics, is marrying these traditional approaches
with molecular biology.
And that was the business at the end-- you know the gene,
and you kind of have an idea of what it might do.
How does that map onto behavioral variability
in humans?
You know the behavior, and you've
got some sense of its variability.
How does that map onto variability in genes?
This is the much more powerful, contemporary end of it.
So what is this end good for?
All it's good for is pronouncing that something's genetic,
or it's 73% genetic and then you trash it
because that's jibberish.
What it's good for mainly is--
OK, so you've got an adoption study--
classical behavior-genetic study--
where they're adopted right at birth, within seconds,
and raised in different households.
Oh, you haven't ruled out environment!
Don't forget prenatal environment.
Oh, you haven't ruled out environment!
Remember the nonrandom assignment
of adoption-- all of that.
Does this mean this approach is useless?
No.
What it's good for is demonstrating nonetheless well
we've just ruled out all sorts of realms of environment
that people would guess is consequential.
It's less consequential than you think.
We haven't ruled out environment entirely.
And just because it's all gene-environment interaction,
we certainly can't come up with a stupid number like that.
But what this is good for is at least showing,
here's domains where people-- a lot of people--
would have assumed there is big environmental effects.
Much less than you would think.
So that's the much more conservative, sort
of sobrietous thing that people can do with that field.
The fact that far too few of them actually
do that is reasons to trash-- no, well, nonetheless, there's
lots of good things in behavior genetics.
But that's the limited domain where it's useful.
OK, so just beginning to get a sense, here,
of the various things that are confusing.
Obviously, no one on earth in any exam in here
is going to be asked to choose which field is better
and which field gives more-- you know, kum by ya
and all of that.
But just recognizing the different approaches
and the wonderful rainbow diversity of ways
to think about mating in fruit flies or whatever.
And just beginning to see by now,
this is what the whole class is about.
Speaking of that, I recall from the first class on that.
There's somebody in here who I think was an English Lit
grad student.
If you have a chance, email me about how it's going in here.
Let's see.
What else?
Next week.
[LAUGHTER]
No, I'm curious.
I am very pleased whoever you are--
assuming you haven't fled after the first class-- is in here.
Let's see.
Other stuff.
OK.
Schedule.
Next Monday, this coming Monday, we
will have a lecture on yet another of our disciplines,
ethology.
And we will see that's a totally different way
of doing it-- blah, blah.
Wednesday, Friday, and the following
Monday are the catch-up lectures in class, taught by the TAs.
Two of the lectures, introduction
to the nervous system.
The third one, introduction to endocrinology.
It will be a broad overview.
It is explicitly designed for people who have
no prior background in this.
But what I think is probably a good idea is,
even if you believe you have prior background in it,
maybe assume it might be a good thing to get a refresher on it.
And this will be very useful.
Following that, we will have two more lectures--
more advanced topics and basic features
of neuroendocrinology-- and then staggering into the midterm.
And then-- oh, then-- the second half comes.
Just a sense of what's coming.
OK.
So that's where we're at.
So now we transition to the next subject,
here, which is-- no, actually, before I forget--
how many-- did people see this-- the article in the New York
Times this morning about the study-- the Chutes and Ladders
study?
Did anybody see it?
It was posted this-- nobody saw it?
This was-- you know the game Chutes and Ladders?
OK, we all played Chutes and Ladders.
This was this massive study funded by the World Health
Organization where what they did--
this is going to be the definitive study
on the subject.
They showed that people from Nepal
are better at playing Chutes and Ladders than are
people from Belgium.
[LAUGHTER]
Cool study!
I don't know how you guys missed it.
OK.
You need to know about this.
This is important.
What do you want to know about this study?
This massive study shows that people from Nepal
are better at Chutes and Ladders than people from Belgium.
Ask me questions, since you were terribly, woefully
underinformed about this.
What more information do you need
to be impressed and tell everybody about it
in the dorm tonight?
What else you want to know about this study?
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
"What does 'better' mean?"
OK, social relativist.
And does it mean that you learn more about yourself
playing Chutes and Ladders?
[LAUGHTER]
Does it mean that you make the world a happy-- you win!
You win, win, win!
OK, so winning is the end point.
Good question.
What else do you want to know about the study?
Yeah.
Why?
Why?
Why?
You ask that?
Read Aristotle!
Since humans first pulled out of the mud,
this has been the thing we have wanted to know.
[LAUGHTER]
And now we do.
[LAUGHTER]
Son, the difference between knowledge and wisdom--
OK, so, why?
OK, what else do you want to know?
What are your questions?
Yeah.
What the methods of the study were.
The methods.
Very good.
OK, various methods.
Do you want to break it down into more details?
Given some of the critical tools you
have by now, in terms of methods,
before deciding how impressed you are or not with this study.
What sort of questions, now, in the methodological realm.
Yeah.
What population they're sampling?
Ah, very good question.
Because we see a first methodological issue.
Are you getting a decent sample size,
so that you're confident that you can actually say something
about the population at large.
And that's a great question.
It was done on everybody in Nepal and everybody in Belgium.
[LAUGHTER]
Good study!
OK, what else do you want to know?
What other questions?
Yeah.
In terms of their method, did they pit people from Nepal
against people from Belgium in one game, or--
Well, that's an excellent question.
Every single person in the study from both Belgium and Nepal
played one game against every single other person
in the study.
[LAUGHTER]
That's why you haven't been hearing
much about either country in the news lately.
They've been very busy with this study.
OK, so, good methodology, large sample size,
random assignments of games.
What else you want to know?
Yeah.
Why-- the question and subject to ask worth reading about,
and why did they [INAUDIBLE]?
Why'd they-- OK, that one again.
It's self-evident.
Know thyself, or know the Nepalese and the Belgians
or something.
This is a-- I'm glad I know this now.
I'm glad they went and did that.
OK, what else do you want to know?
Obviously, a matter of subjective
taste as to what counts as an important scientific subject.
this strikes me as critical.
What else do you want to know, in terms
of what sort of conclusions?
They kind of hint-- they're not positive--
but they're kind of hinting at a genetic component to it.
Yeah-- question in the back, there.
Yeah.
What skills are involved in Chutes and Ladders?
What skills are involved?
It involves, um-- what is it?
They have a whole list, there.
Um-- let's see.
Various tasks involving spatial memory.
Various tasks involving reversal performance and telekinesis.
[LAUGHTER]
So it taps into all of those domains.
What else do you want to know about the study?
Yeah
Is it inheritable?
Is it heritable?
Great-- oh, ho, ho, is it heritable!
So which are you asking about?
OK, well, they did it.
They are suggesting there's some degree of heritability.
And they did it right.
They went after all the issues we've learned about by now.
Specifically, what I'm saying is that every single person
in Nepal and in Belgium was cross-fostered to somebody
in Ecuador.
[LAUGHTER]
In fact, they did it fetally, right after conception.
[LAUGHTER]
So they can-- the prenatal stuff.
What else do you want to know, in order to decide,
am I impressed about the fact that people from Nepal
are better at Chutes and Ladders than people from Belgium?
Yeah.
Were they all good at the exact same amount
of Chutes and Ladders as children?
Oh!
Yes.
In fact, none of them had been exposed to it before.
They were all raised in hydroponic gardens,
without Chutes and Ladders--
[LAUGHTER]
--and they were only released in time for doing this.
OK what else?
Yes.
What's the amount of variance within each individual group?
Oh, good question!
Here we are, getting to that-- all of that.
Everybody got the exact same score from Nepal,
and everybody from Belgium got the exact same score.
So that's kind of impressive.
Are you impressed yet?
Are you impressed enough yet to go run out of here,
screaming with this news?
What else do you need to know?
Yeah.
Who went first?
Who went first?
They randomized it.
They randomized it by-- the entire populations played, um--
oh, what is that--
Roshambo.
Roshambo, yes.
They played roshambo.
And, best of all, they had to play roshambo in Esperanto.
Yes-- more.
What was the environment in which they test [INAUDIBLE]?
OK, they were released from the hydroponic garden,
and then all of them were placed in a completely sterile bubble
environment, where all they had in there
were copies of People magazine in a language they didn't
understand.
So it was well--
[LAUGHTER]
Environment was very well controlled-for.
What else do you need to know?
How much better were they?
Like, 0.001--
Ah!
Ah!
There we have it.
They had a huge sample size.
They cross-fostered as fetuses.
They controlled for environment.
They got everybody in there.
They did the right techniques.
They randomized at every possible choice.
That is so impressive.
That is so impress--
How big is the difference?
Is it a big difference?
And this is a critical thing to start putting there
in your armamentarium of critical questions,
to start having skeptical ones.
Great.
You've got a whole bunch of tools by now.
Whoa!
They said "genetic."
Did you control for this?
Did you control for that?
Whoa, they see a difference, there.
Well, wait a second.
Did they all have the same exper-- whoa,
did they have a big sample size?
All of it covered.
Great, wonderful, perfect science.
They get every single bit of it covered, there.
But then the critical thing you better ask
is, how big is the difference?
Is it impressive or not?
Because we all think we've got the basic tools-- or hopefully
we all have the basic tools-- for going at these issues.
OK, was a study done in a way that
was clear-cut and unobjective?
Were people blinded to whether or not
this person was Nepalese or Belgian
or-- was there appropriate blinding?
Was it done in a way that you can falsify your finding--
in a sense, the definition of experimental science?
Was it designed in-- was it independently
replicated by anybody else?
We all have those tools under our belt by now.
But far too often, we are not trained, at that point,
to say, wait a second.
Before I get all excited, how big of a difference was it?
Let me give you a real example of this.
And this was a paper, about three years ago,
in the journal Science-- which you should get a sense by now
that the journals Science and Nature are
the two official biggie ones on this planet,
in terms of credibility.
And this was a paper having to do with IQ.
And this was a paper having to do with IQ and birth order.
And what they showed in this paper,
with spectacular statistical confidence and as much
of, like, all the controls in place
as you can ask for from the hydroponically gardened fetuses
in Nepal-- they did absolutely perfectly.
What they showed in the definitive study,
with 250,000 18-year-olds in Norway,
was that there is a reliable IQ difference
depending on whether you were firstborn or latter-born.
OK, how many of you are firstborn?
Whoa!
How many of you are only childs?
OK, how many of you are number 2?
How many of you are more than number 2?
OK, so, how many of you think the highest
IQ comes from the firstborn?
[LAUGHTER]
OK, and we'll assume the converse with the other group.
Did anybody just vote against their own birth order?
[LAUGHTER]
Whoa-- OK.
Well, that's-- impressive.
We salute you.
OK, so they found a difference.
They found a difference, which is,
firstborns-- in this very statistically reliable way--
have higher IQ than latter-borns.
They restricted the analysis just to second-borns
to keep things clearer.
And they showed firstborns have higher IQ than second-borns.
250,000 people-- as close as you can
get to all the people from Nepal and Belgian.
Huge sample size.
So they report this.
This was the most thorough study ever done.
So what sort of questions do you want to ask?
Give me hypotheses for what's going on.
Obviously, sort of one is that, like,
the parents pour protein into the ears of firstborn
and the second one just gets Fritos or something.
But give me other hypotheses for what could be happening.
Possible explanation for this, in terms
of biological, sociocultural, endo, immuno, psycho-- yeah.
I think we already know that firstborns tend to be more,
like-- well, I mean-- it's like the parents-- they're more
worried about making mistakes, and they kind of raise them
harder, so to speak, and then they sort of relax
on the second-born child. [INAUDIBLE]
firstborns tend to go to college more and stuff like that--
do more traditional [INAUDIBLE].
OK, so, great hypothesis.
It's more parental investment in the firstborn,
and those are the ones with the parents freak out
with everything.
And by the time there's a third one,
they're all foraging on their own
when they're six months old.
[LAUGHTER]
OK, so, parental investment.
They went after that one correctly.
Here's what they showed, to rule that out.
Which was, if you are an only child,
you have a lower IQ-- on the average,
blah blah-- then firstborns who have younger siblings.
So it's not parental investment.
It's something about being the firstborn of multiples.
Yeah.
[INAUDIBLE] firstborns are expected
to kind of like [INAUDIBLE].
OK, so pressure on the firstborns to be first born.
How would that raise IQ?
Um-- all right, just kind of like-- kind
of like responsibility [INAUDIBLE]?
OK, so that's one of the models out there.
A variant on that is, firstborns get
pushed into a tutoring position, early on.
And the well-known fact that occasionally now
within teaching something actually
causes you to know what you're talking about.
So the firstborns, because of this tutoring role-- oh,
that would control for the single child
versus the firstborn difference, there.
So maybe it's a tutoring phenomenon.
What else could be happening?
What other possible notions?
Yeah.
It depends what age you're looking at the kids at.
Because if you're looking at, like, actual children
and comparing IQs, older children
will probably have higher IQs because they've had longer time
in life to learn.
OK.
Great idea.
Up to age 12, latter-borns tend to have
higher IQ than firstborns.
By age 18, which is when this study was carried out,
it flips the other way around.
So, any hypotheses for why this difference occurs?
Why, by 12 years of age, latter-borns
tend to have higher IQs than firstborns?
Why does that then flip afterward?
Yeah.
[INAUDIBLE]
OK, so is it IQ testing-- some biases with that.
What would rule against that, though,
is that the age controlling for only
childs-- only children-- versus firstborns.
So that would definitely be a possibility.
That was ruled out.
Yeah.
I think that I [INAUDIBLE] in another class
that you said it had to do with the ratio of adults
in the environment when the kids were growing up.
So when there's only one child, you
have more adults with higher language skills, and--
Good.
OK, so another version of a parental-investment model,
there, which is, the fewer the children, the more
parental energy.
So, again, that's one of the standard things in the field.
They ruled that out with comparing the only children
versus firstborn child.
So that's been a dominant model in the field,
so they had good data against that.
Yeah.
Could it be the age of the mother
when the baby is a fetus?
Oh, OK!
What's your idea about that?
Well, younger mothers-- maybe the fetal environment
is better, and obviously older children
have younger mothers than their siblings whose-- the mother
[INAUDIBLE]?
OK, so we've got an intrauterine effect.
So we've got egg quality and age of mom and all of that.
They controlled for that-- the age of the mother.
Can anybody think of something-- another intrauterine mechanism,
though-- for what's the difference between being
the first fetus who hits the womb
of your mother versus being the second or third or fourth?
What's one of the biological things that might happen?
Yeah.
Stress levels.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
OK, stress levels, which is a way of stating something
about intrauterine environment.
The more times you've done this, perhaps more
stressed you are in there.
What else could biologically-- that's definitely
one of the things.
What else biologically can happen, over time?
Remember progesterone, the other day,
from that lecture of making new if-then clauses
and glucocorticoids.
And this is a bit of a stretch.
This takes some sort of fair amount of OB/GYN knowledge.
What's a danger as you have more and more pregnancies,
in terms of your immune system?
[INAUDIBLE]
Yeah-- wait-- I heard that mumbled!
Sure!
It gets surpressed?
Yeah.
OK, immune suppression.
So mom could be getting a lot less healthy,
which is another version of tapping into that notion,
there, in terms of egg quality with age.
Separate of age, the number of times you've gone through this.
What could be another possibility, immunologically,
with repeated pregnancies?
Yeah?
A mother [INAUDIBLE] more, like, form antigens [INAUDIBLE]?
OK, despite that immune suppression, on the average,
with later pregnancies you have a greater likelihood
of having formed antibodies against aspects of the fetus.
They controlled for that.
They showed, if you were second-born
and there were kids after that-- if you were second-born
and the firstborn died, you reverted to the firstborn IQ.
Showing that it was not anything about,
oh, you were the second fetus in there, with more antibodies.
They controlled for that.
That's actually one of the ideas they brought up in there.
What else?
How about that business about up to age 12,
the second-born does better?
After that, by age 18, the firstborn does better.
Any theories with that?
Yeah.
Did it have to do, maybe, with how fast they grow,
or something?
I know we talked about how for fathers it's,
like, a child grows faster [INAUDIBLE]
more later [INAUDIBLE] grow faster then
that takes a toll on your [INAUDIBLE] health?
OK, so an early advantage, and you pay for it later,
type deal.
So that's a possibility.
What else could come in?
Think about-- back to the idea, there,
about if you're a firstborn.
Some of the firstborn responsibility stuff.
How that plays out in family dynamics early on.
Why are the second-borns doing better
in the first dozen years?
Why is it reversed later on?
More ideas about that.
Yeah.
The second-born benefits from the tutelage
of the firstborn early in life.
But later on, having the older having had that
experience of being more responsible [INAUDIBLE].
Exactly.
That's one of the main theories.
That's probably the predominant one proposed
to explain that age switch.
You get the second kid show up, and suddenly you
have a neotenized, dumbed-down environment,
where suddenly the 8-year-old kid
is watching Tinky Winky again for the first time in six
years.
That it's an environment that's then dominated more
by having a younger one around.
And what the older one is mostly doing is the tutoring.
And it takes a number of years for the advantages of that
to finally come through.
That's the main model that's given for that.
Any other ideas?
How about parental-resource stuff?
The fact that the larger the family, on the average,
in westernized countries, the lower the socioeconomic status?
Run with that one.
Where does that fit in?
What else?
What else could be happening with that?
Yeah.
If the socioeconomic status of the family is lower,
then wouldn't that suggest that the children might
bear more burden, in some respects, with more children
around, so that they had to grow up more quickly
and be exposed to the real world?
It's the later ones who are out hunting squirrels and not
getting the violin lessons.
That's another version of the parental-resource one, one
being because there's a smaller ratio of parents
to the kids, the other being because the more kids, the more
expensive for the same parental income.
And you have got less to spread to each child.
So they controlled for that, looking at within family
rather than just between family.
They covered all of this.
This is going to be the definitive study
for the rest of all of time, showing what's
going on with IQ by birth order in 18-year-olds in Norway
in 2007.
What was the magnitude of the difference for this study?
2.3 IQ points.
And thus, coming back to what could
have been the very first question sitting there
when these guys were ready to announce this
to the world and sort of start selling
their "be like a firstborn IQ" self-help books and all
of that.
Lost in there-- and this was picked up all over the press
and, like, no doubt, endless snotty comments by David
Letterman or--
And nobody-- 2.3 IQ points!
You sneeze while you're taking an IQ test
and have to wipe your nose for eight seconds afterward,
and that's going to cost you 2.3 IQ points, because you
get distracted for a second.
An amazing example of this whole business of-- yes,
impeccable science that these people did-- phenomenal!
I don't know who possibly gave them the money
to do a study like this.
And at the end of the day, totally cool,
irrefutable, statistically totally reliable--
which is very different from saying "important."
But what you get at the end of the day
was this mammoth study producing 2.3 difference.
And this is a great demonstration.
The difference between how solid the science
is, how confident you are of the finding-- which
takes in all the variables of sample size and objectivity--
how confident you are of the finding,
and how big of a finding it is.
And those could be two entire differences.
So, as a [INAUDIBLE] you to all the stuff that's
going to come in the second half of the course, one
of the next tools you have to have in mind,
in addition to all the ones that were apparent
here in the questions you were asking-- another one
is to keep saying, well, is this a big effect?
"Is this a reliable effect?" is different
from "Is this a big effect?" "Is this a consequential one?"
So, another tool to have in hand.
So, with that in hand, go and tell everybody tonight
about Chutes and Ladders.
OK.
So what we jump to now is something
that's been running through a whole bunch of the lectures
already.
OK, we've got all those evolutionary models
of individual selection and kin selection and in-group
and out-group.
And we've got something about the molecular biology
of why it is that you share 50% of your genes
with this relative and 25 and 12 and a half, and all of that.
And somewhere in there, lurking through all of it,
is a question which is what we'll
focus on now, which is, how do organisms, how do animals,
how do individuals recognize relatives?
Because you can't do any of that evolutionary-biology,
kin-selection-theory stuff, where it's all predicated
on degree of relatedness, unless you know how related
am I with this individual.
So what we're going to be looking at, here, is, why--
or how-- sure, let's go for "how" instead of "why"--
how do animals, how do social animals, recognize kin?
What's clear is, it does not take a very fancy organism.
And there was a great example of this,
which I think I stuck in the extended notes, last minute--
a paper published just a couple weeks ago looking at deer mice.
Deer mice, and much like their vole cousins--
if they are cousins-- some deer-mice strains are
monogamous, and some are polygamous.
This appears to be a frequent theme
in these little rodent things.
And with the deer mice, what you find
is, with the polygamous ones one female mates
with a bunch of males.
And as a result, one female will have
sperm from a number of different males afterward in the vagina.
And what you get is, evolutionarily,
from all the rules we learned by now, perfectly logically,
you get intrasexual competition between the sperm
from the different males.
We already heard a version of that
with the flies, back the other week,
there, where the sperm of one releases
toxins that kill the other sperm but in the process could
damage the female's future-- all of that.
This is a theme that runs through a lot of the literature
on sexual competition.
Sperm competition.
And there's even hints that something like that
goes on in humans.
OK.
So what form does it take?
In these deer mice, as follows.
I don't begin to understand the mechanics of this,
nor do I want to.
But apparently, with deer-mice sperm,
if they all clump together-- you know,
many hands on the oars, or something.
If they all clump together, you get this macro sperm thing
which swims upstream faster.
And the paper had all sorts of diagrams
of this which I did not want to look at in much detail.
But there's this--
So you've got-- with the polygamous strains,
you've got this problem.
If your sperm want to do things absolutely correctly,
they only want to form one of these big-old,
you know, pleasure-boat aggregate crew things,
with sperm from themselves-- with sperm from only
themselves.
And, following all of our theorizing,
to a lesser extent with close relatives and not at all with
sperm from some other guy.
And that's precisely what they showed in this paper.
You take sperm from monogamous strains,
and you put sperm from different males together,
and they all happily form this big cooperative clump of sperm,
there.
But you take them from species that
have evolved under the selective pressure of polygamy,
and the sperm there know who they're related to
and will form these clumps only with the ones from themselves.
You can immediately design all sorts of lock-and-key stories
for how it's pulled off.
You could immediately come up with some approximation
of what the molecular mechanism would be.
But for a first pass, what's striking here is, oh,
how do organisms recognize relatives?
There are, out there, single cells
that can do this under exactly the evolutionary
circumstances-- models that we've got already.
So, as we begin to look, now, at how whole organisms do it,
even cells can do it.
And we're going to see lots of different possible mechanisms.
In lots of species, what you have is some equivalent of what
those single sperm are doing, which is,
there is innate recognition of relatives.
How do you show this?
We already know the classic ways of doing this, which is
the crossed-fostering approach.
You take a litter, newborn litter, of your rodents,
and you cross-foster them to other females.
And if, later on, they can behaviorally
differentiate between their siblings and nonsiblings,
there's something innate about it.
Oh!
Wait a second, wait a second.
What about prenatal environment?
Wasn't there something about-- so now you
do the prenatal cross-fostering--
the fetal-transplant approach-- and you get
the exact same thing.
There is innate recognition of relatedness
in all sorts of rodent species.
Another way of doing it even cleaner.
You have two different litters from the same mother and father
rodent.
And then they meet together.
So there was no shared prenatal environment.
And you can show recognition there.
You put the rat, later on, into the cage where
there is the urine of its sibling,
and there is the urine of a perfect stranger,
and they will prefer going to that one.
You could show that it's even more subtle than that.
They will prefer to go to the urine of a full sibling
versus a half sibling, a half sibling versus a first cousin--
all the way on down.
They could take it out to about third or fourth cousins.
Incredible discrimination, there, that can go into it.
And it has to be that way, or else all of the theorizing from
the other day-- you can't figure out how to give up your life
for two cousins or eight brothers or eight brothers or--
[FEEDBACK]
--two cousins, or whatever the math
is, unless you know who's who.
And in some species where it's done entirely instinctually,
that would be the way you demonstrate it.
So what's the mechanism, , there, in those cases?
The most-studied ones are olfactory.
Olfactory signatures.
"Pheromones"-- we've already heard that term in here.
We're going to hear tons more about it.
But pheromonal communication.
What does that begin to require?
If you have pheromones, odorants, coming out of, say,
the urine from different individuals,
telling you your degree of relatedness to them,
it requires two things.
It requires qualitative differences in the urine,
reflecting the genetic makeup of the individual who provided
that urine to the grad student.
And it requires some mechanism, some olfactory brain-processing
mechanism, to be able to pick up whatever those differences are.
And both have been shown.
OK.
The way you begin to get the differentiation
at the end of how the urine smells differently.
What you've got-- and referred to back
with the transposable stuff is-- you remember,
in vertebrates you've got some of your highest rates
of transposable events in your immune system,
your genes devoted to immunity, where you juggle them around.
And that's how, with any luck, you come up
with an antibody that will recognize this completely
novel pathogen. All of that.
There's an additional stretch of genes
in that neighborhood where what happens with that is,
it also undergoes huge amounts of splicing and transposition
and juggling and all of that.
And what do you do then is, you create a completely unique
protein.
You do it in enough of a combinatorial way
that it would take statistically 400 quadrillion
googleflex-whatevers to come up with another organism
with the exact same protein signature.
When you make a protein from that,
you have made up one that no other organism on earth has,
with a very high statistical reliability.
This is a stretch of genes called
the "major histocompatibility complex"-- MHCs.
And what you see with those is histocompatibility,
that whole business with organ transplants-- how
compatible of a donor is it, how closely related,
how much of this-- jargon, for those of you
who know it-- how much of a shared antigenic determinant,
how genetically similar is this fingerprint, this identifying
ID of a protein?
That determines things like histocompatibility--
how well organ transfers work.
That's the origins of the term.
So every single one of us, every single organism out there,
has made an arguably unique juggle of these genes
and comes up with this signature protein
that it sticks on the surface of every single one of its cells.
What's that good for?
That's good for your immune system
learning, if we run into a cell with one of those things,
it's us.
Don't attack it.
Don't form antibodies against it.
And if we run into anything else in here that
doesn't have one of those, it's an invasive pathogen,
and go attack it.
This is the basis of the self/nonself recognition
ability of the immune system.
And what autoimmune diseases are is when your immune system
screws up and begins to mistake one of your signature proteins,
your major histocompatibility gene
derived signature protein, as, in fact, being invasive.
And one of the other things you hear about-- the other day,
we heard about this tropical parasite, trypanosome.
What it does, as you heard, was it
keeps juggling its surface proteins.
So just as your immune system is all set to attack it,
because it's got antibodies to recognize it,
it has changed its signature protein.
There's another tropical parasite, schistosomes,
where what they do is they steal your major histocompatibility
proteins from the surface of some of your cells
and glue it on themselves.
And they are wolves in a sheep major histocompatibility
proteins or some such things.
So that's one major domain where this unique protein-- derived
from a unique gene-- unique protein signature
lets your immune system work properly.
So it turns out there's another whole domain with it, which
is, these proteins can become soluble.
Which means they're no longer anchored to a cell,
they're just floating around.
And ultimately they're floating around in your saliva,
in your urine, in your armpit exudates or whatever it is.
And what they begin to do-- complicated mechanisms, which
I think I will bypass.
What they do is give a unique signature to the pheromones
coming off of you.
And, as we will see in the lectures
to come, animals of all sorts of species can tell,
is this individual of my species,
are they the same gender, are they an adult,
are they sexually mature, are they healthy,
are they pregnant-- whatever.
But thanks to this major-histocompatibility
business they can also tell, is this a relative?
Now the juggling of events, the splicing and the juggling
of the genes, has some degree of statistical relatedness
the more closely related you are.
In other words, you smell your own urine--
if that's your hobby-- and the major histocompatibility genes
in there will obviously exactly match your own.
You smell those of a full sibling--
even more questions to be asked-- and you do that,
and there will be a greater degree, statistically,
of similarity of the structure of that protein
than with a second cousin, than with a perfect stranger,
than with a Nepalese if you're from Belgium.
Whatever it is, what you find in those cases is,
that's how you not only get innate olfactory
recognition of, is this a relative or not,
but how related of a relative?
So that's half of it.
That's how you generate the unique signature
at the olfaction at the pheromone end.
The other trick is, how do you generate
an olfactory system that can make that discrimination?
And all we've got to go with, at that point, is-- you can guess,
if you think about it a bit-- is,
we've got to have some version of olfactory receptors
that do the old lock-and-key business.
Just as you make a protein which has a certain shape,
indicating that this is your unique signature.
What you want to do is have receptors
that will have the uniquely complimentary shape
for the lock and key so that you can do a-- oh!
This fits perfectly.
Let's transduce this to a signal to the brain, saying,
I'm smelling my armpit.
And if, instead, you've got a protein that
fits in there like a lock and key but not quite as well,
you send the message of, oh, I'm smelling my sibling's armpit.
And if it fits in there not quite as well, and all the way
down, you could begin to see exactly how you designed this.
If you've got 1,000 of these receptors of this shape
and every single one of them it has them fitting in well enough
to stay in there for three seconds, so that all 1,000
of them send the signal.
It takes three seconds of binding there
to cause the signal to happen.
All 1,000 of them send the signal that means "it's me."
It doesn't fit quite as well, so, statistically, only 800
of them stay in there for three seconds, so 800 of the cells
are reporting, oh, that's a full sibling.
I don't know if that's the mechanism.
But this would be a way of constructing it.
That's exactly how it could be, along the lines of lock
and key, genes produce proteins of certain shapes,
certain functions-- all of that.
And that's how you begin to do it.
What have we just gotten?
We've gotten a protein-- a molecular basis
of our theorizing, the other day, of an if/then clause.
If and only if this is a close relative,
then send a message to the neurons that do "cooperation."
We already know that's gibberish,
to say that there's neurons that do cooperation.
But you could begin to see how this is going to work.
This is the "if" part of all the conditional if/then
clauses built around degree of relatedness.
So how does your olfactory bulb do this?
Very interestingly, people are beginning
to get a sense of two hormones that are relevant to this.
One is called "oxytocin," and the other
is called "vasopressin."
And what we will see in lectures to come is, particularly
in females, oxytocin has long been
known to play some, like, plumbing, nuts-and-bolts job
in giving birth, and vasopressin in uterine contractions.
And take your average, like, off-the-rack endocrinologist.
And what these hormones are about
is, like, your uterus contracting and giving birth.
But oh, that's so little of what they do.
What they're much more interestingly involved with
is what happens next.
Which is now beginning to learn how
to recognize the smell of the individual
you just gave birth to.
Because it turns out, what oxytocin and vasopressin do
in the olfactory bulbs-- the olfactory system,
the olfactory equivalent of your eyes and ears--
is they tune up the cells that recognize
major histocompatibility signals.
They make them attuned to, is this a relative or not?
And there's an if/then clause.
If the levels of this hormone have the certain high levels
indicating that I just gave birth,
and I smell something whose signature odorants fit really
well to this receptor, then this is
someone who I'm going to nurse like crazy, unless it turns out
to be my mother or grandmother.
OK, let's put it another-- if they're very little and cutesy
and make cute little mewling sounds,
then I will take care of them and nurse them
and all that sort of thing.
And it's turning out that that's what oxytocin and vasopressin
are doing in there.
You generate mice with genetically-- knocking out
oxytocin or vasopressin or their receptors--
if these are totally new terms, this will come by the week
after next, as an introduction.
You knock out those genes, and you get what
is called a "social anosmia."
Anosmia is the inability to smell something.
A social anosmia is, your nose is working just fine--
if you're a rat, you could discriminate different food
types-- completely arbitrary odors-- you just
can't distinguish between individuals.
And there was a paper, a couple of weeks ago,
showing for the first time-- what the model has always been
is that circulating oxytocin and vasopressin
get into your olfactory system and have those effects.
What this paper showed for the first time is,
you're making those hormones right in your nostrils,
to begin with.
This is what tunes it up.
Very interestingly, there is also
a literature emerging suggesting mutations
in genes relevant to oxytocin and vasopressin
in families with a high incidence of autism.
Autism, a disease where-- one way of characterizing it is,
there are enormous deficits in normal socialization
interaction, social bonding, social affiliation.
And this suggests that has something to do with it.
OK, so that's a first mechanism.
That's how it might work innately.
Very cool study in recent years, also showing one facet of this.
One of the things you get taught in Intro Neuro--
if you've taken anytime in the last 5,000 years--
is, when you've got an adult brain,
it doesn't make any more neurons.
You've got all the neurons you're ever going to get,
by the time you're three years old,
and all you can do thereafter is squander them away on, like,
stupid weekend binges or whatever.
And it turns out that, nonetheless, this is not true.
And arguably this is the biggest revolution in neuroscience
in the last decade or so.
Adult "neurogenesis."
And it turns out, this adult neurogenesis
happens in only two areas in the brain.
The first one is really interesting.
Because it's this part of the brain called the "hippocampus."
Hippocampus-- learning, memory.
It's totally cool.
And a gazillion studies now showing stuff
like, you learn a new fact, you stimulate neurogenesis
in your hippocampus.
You get put in an enriched environment,
you exercise, you do all sorts of stuff--
you make new neurons there.
You get stressed, you make less new neurons there.
This whole new field.
And 99% of the studies have been about these populations
of neural stem cells in the hippocampus.
Totally ignored has been the second, little pocket
of these neural stem cells that can make new neurons.
Nobody's interested in it.
What's this about?
It's totally boring.
Where's the second pocket?
Just behind the olfactory bulb.
And what this study showed-- and this is one in your reader,
just at the abstract.
What it showed was, if you have a rat right
around the time she gets pregnant,
she starts to make a new neurons out the wazoo--
not from the exciting hippocampal pocket,
but from this boring, little olfactory.
And what goes on with the onset of pregnancy--
female rodents do this massive renovation
job of all their olfactory neurons going on, there.
What it is, they showed in this study--
it is driven by the prolactin levels that
rise during pregnancy.
And what have you got there?
What they showed was, right around the time
she gives birth, she's got this spanking-new, completely
renovated olfactory system, just in time
to do one of the most important olfactory things of her life,
which is quickly figure out which ones are her babies.
To quickly do the social bonding to them.
What hasn't been tested yet, but what
I guarantee has to be there, is that vasopressin and oxytocin
has to have some sort of role going on in there.
Really interesting.
Interesting implication of this.
So think about this.
If you were pregnant-- and assuming this works in mammals
other than rodents-- and if you were pregnant--
so the whole time you were pregnant, what's going on?
You're doing this huge job of ripping out
the walls and the plumbing in your olfactory bulb and, like,
putting in new stuff.
And it's a total mess.
Like, you spend your pregnancy with your olfactory system
totally cockeyed.
No wonder stuff smells weird, and no wonder foods
taste weird and all of that.
There is a whole adaptationist literature
out there on, why should it be that you suddenly
want pickles and these foods you can't stand the taste of?
And it's to avoid inadvertently eating toxins.
A really unconvincing, spandrel-filled
literature out there.
It may be an inadvertent spandrel byproduct of,
you're ripping apart the whole olfactory system,
so you're all set to recognize the smell of your kids.
You just got screwy olfaction and taste
all throughout pregnancy.
The main point of this, though, is,
this is endocrine regulation driving,
not to make you able to recognize
a relative-- because you've already got the genes in place
for that-- just making sure that your olfactory bulb is
at the very best at that time for doing it.
OK.
What else does one want to know about that?
OK, one additional thing you could do with that information.
Which is, OK, so, why do you want
to know who your relatives are?
It's who you mate with, it's who you cooperate
with, it's who you try to kill, it's
who you take care of, it's who-- all that sort of thing.
All of these domains.
Also it's who you pay attention to socially,
in terms of gossip and such.
One interesting study that was shown,
which was with baboons-- and this
was the same folks at the University of Pennsylvania.
What they did was they recorded the voices--
You notice this business about playing
the voices of some animal in the bushes
and looking at the response in everybody else
is one of these standard tools.
What they did, in this case, was,
the voice of two animals from that group, from that troop.
And what we heard was the voice of the lower-ranking animal
giving a dominating vocalization,
and the voice of the lower-ranking individual
giving this terrified subordinating noise.
So they obviously were not getting a terrified
subordinating noise out of number 1,
but they had to sit around and get recordings
of number 2 and everybody else, at some point or other,
so now they could put them down there.
And they would play this.
So everybody else is sitting there and saying, what?
Number 4 is terrified of number 27?
What's going on?
And what they showed was, everybody paid a huge attention
to this, if they were hearing-- number 27 was trashing number
4 if they weren't relatives.
But if they were in the same family,
and there was this dominance reversal nobody paid attention.
Crazy relatives.
Who knows what's going on in that family?
They're just squabbling.
They distinguish the social implications
of a dominance reversal, depending
on relatedness or not.
One additional thing with it, before we
go to our next way of recognizing relatives,
after the break-- hold on.
One additional thing is, of course,
telling you who to mate with.
And it's obvious who you're supposed to mate with,
in species after species-- someone
who is not related to you.
Because if you do, you may inadvertently
produce babies with two tails and seven fingers
and all of that.
Nobody picked up on the fact that actually we
have 10 fingers instead of five, but we'll let that slide.
But what you get there is, oh, avoid inbreeding.
Don't breed with relatives.
But we've already heard about a counterargument, which
is, breed with relatives because of the inclusive fitness,
the kin-selection advantages of doing that.
And, from the first minute people
started getting these theoretical models,
it was clear that, in fact, there
were contradictory pulls between doing
major outbreeding in your mating and doing
inbreeding with your mating.
And people did all these theoretical models
of econometrics of where you optimize the difference.
And they came out with the conclusion
that, in all sorts of species, the optimal balance
of avoiding inbreeding disasters with advantages
of kin selection would be to mate with something
like a third cousin.
And you go and look at all sorts of species out there,
and that's precisely what they do.
That's where it balances out.
And, again, you can't do that unless you know relatedness.
Then, a couple of years ago, along came this researcher--
Martha McClintock, University of Chicago.
She's the person who discovered the Wellesley effect back when.
And for all of you guys who are gearing up for senior honors
theses, this was her senior honors thesis-- discovering
the Wellesley effect.
So this was, like, one impressive study.
Yeah?
Did Darwin marry a second cousin? [INAUDIBLE]
Who did-- he married a first cousin?
First cousin [INAUDIBLE].
First cousin.
There you go.
When we all know he would much rather have married a Galapagos
tortoise, but his parents forced him--
[LAUGHTER]
Well, interesting exam-- OK, so you thus catapult us, here,
into the human realm.
What McClintock did was a study, a couple of years
ago, where she took swabs-- she has this whole paradigm of very
high-tech-- getting cotton balls and rubbing it
on people's armpits and putting it in a jar,
there, and then getting these volunteers who
can [SNIFF] smell it and give some assessment of how good it
smells or not.
Which, in and of itself, is pretty wild.
And you run that with humans.
And of a curve of relatedness, whose odor gets rated
as having the most appealing?
Third cousins.
Yuck!
Think about that one later.
We are just another species, in that regard.
All of this suggesting, even in humans,
you are balancing this disadvantages
of inbreeding with the kin-selection advantages.
And, again, there's no way you can do that without knowing
who's related to what extent.
OK.
Five-minute break.
And what we'll then transition to are,
species that don't do it innately but instead
have to imprint, early on, after encountering them.
OK, let's get going again.
Let's see.
First off, thanks to the wonders of Wikipedia
never being that far away from us, we now know-- here
were Charles Darwin's parents, who were third cousins.
And then Charles Darwin married his first cousin.
So there you have it-- something or other.
But this apparently was rather common at the time.
And is not quite the optimal, according to Martha McClintock.
OK.
So, pushing on.
So we've now seen why you would want
to recognize your relatives and recognize
the degree of relatedness.
All of our models of who to compete with, who to mate with,
who to nurse, who to take care of,
who to be voyeuristic about.
And we've seen the first domain where
you can do that, which is to recognize somebody innately.
And one very confusing aspect of it,
which I managed to make confusing,
is-- so, what's up with olfaction
with that and oxytocin and vasopressin and prolactin?
OK, as follows.
It is innate that you will have receptors, olfactory receptors,
in your olfactory neurons, in your olfactory bulb--
in your nose.
It is innate that you will have olfactory receptors that
will be able to detect degree of relatedness--
how close an olfactory signature is to your own.
That is innate.
That will be there.
What appears to be the case is, oxytocin and vasopressin
make you more likely to make those receptors-- increase
the number of those receptors.
So this is not oxytocin and vasopressin making you suddenly
be able to recognize relatives.
It's just making you better at doing
that-- more sensitized to it.
So that you have 100 receptors reporting instead
of 10 of them-- more accuracy.
What prolactin appears to be doing is--
and this is under study, but the best bet is,
this is another way of getting more of these olfactory
receptors online, right around birth,
to innately recognize your relative.
And this time, instead of making neurons
make more copies of the receptors,
it's making more neurons.
There's going to be more subtlety than that.
But broadly, those are two different ways
of making you better at doing something
that is innate in you.
Rather than making you suddenly able to learn how to do this.
So we now transition to the second way
in which relatives are recognized,
where it's not innate.
It requires imprinting.
It requires some sort of learning which leaves
a long-lasting message of it.
Imprinting.
So now we've got imprinting in yet another use of the word.
And major use of it coming next Monday.
Imprinting-- how an animal learns who its mother is.
How a mother learns who its babies are.
How it imprints on the smell, on the sound,
on the whatever of its offspring or parent--
how that learning goes on.
What is clear is, that's a case where
the learning that the learning occurs at that point is innate.
What is learned is experiential.
Important sort of distinction, there.
OK.
So, what goes on with this?
So in lots of species, you learn the sound
of your infant's voice.
In lots of species, you learn the odor.
In lots of species, you learn what they look like.
Different species, different modalities that dominate.
What goes into, for example, learning what
your offspring smells like?
Remember, it's not innate in these cases.
For example, a goat, a sheep-- whatever-- they do not innately
have the means of recognizing, oh, this
is somebody whose major histocompatibility proteins are
fairly similar to mine.
In fact, they share 50% homology.
Oh, this must be my child.
That's not done that way.
These are not innate cases.
So what sort of rules might you have for how
to recognize your offspring?
Here's a simple one.
OK, there's a whole bunch of babies out here,
and which ones are mine?
And I'm a goat trying to figure out
which one I'm going to nurse.
What would be a good rule that is not innate,
instead building on learning something at that point?
I know-- I'm going to start taking care of whichever kid
there smells like my vaginal fluids.
That's a pretty reliable way of figuring out
this is somebody you just gave birth to.
Or, this is someone who I lick as they're first coming out.
And, for a while afterward, I figure out, who am I nice to?
Someone who smells like my saliva.
Someone who I scent-mark right after this
is someone who smells like my whatever
glands I'm using, there.
This is someone who smells like my amniotic fluid.
This is someone who, after I get that learned,
I then nurse them for the first time-- this is someone whose
mouth smells like my milk.
You could see, now, in this case,
it is learning being built on top
of whatever your own recognition system is of smell.
You can have elaborations on this.
How do you recognize a sibling in species where it is
learned in this imprinting way?
Oh, I'm going to imprint as a relative on somebody who
smells just like mom.
Somebody who smells like mom's vaginal fluid or her saliva
or any of that same stuff going on, there.
Or, I'm going to be nice to someone who smells like someone
I mated with back when.
That's another strategy in various species.
You could begin to see how all of these
are ways of just getting logical information.
Someone who has the voice like someone
who I heard peeping when they were still inside the egg.
Oh, it's them!
I'm going to nurse-- no, I'm not going to nurse them,
I'm going to give them worms or whatever it is birds do.
But all these ways of using sensory information
to say, oh, that's the one!
That's the one.
That's how I know it's them.
So, all sorts of ways in which this could be done.
How can you prove that this is not hardwired-- this is not
absolutely dominating?
A technique we've been hearing about already, which is
that cross-fostering business.
Which is, you take newborn whatevers,
and you switch mothers on them, and the mothers
will take care of them.
What does that tell you?
It means other attributes of these pups coming over
to them-- these rat pups-- override the fact-- wait,
these kids don't smell like my vaginal fluid!
Wow, they're cute, though, and there's no other moms around,
and they sure look cuddly, and--
So maybe it takes you 10 seconds to decide, this is one of mine,
instead of three seconds.
You have different things being played out, there.
Contrasting sort of signals coming through.
So that's another domain of doing that.
So now we move to us and how we do recognizing relatives.
And initially what the answer seems to be
is that we have a different version of it.
We do not recognize relatives innately,
nor do we recognize relatives by imprinting.
We don't do that deal of, like, we smell our parents right
after they're born, or we sniff the vaginal fluid
and that's how we know who mom is forever after, or stuff
like that.
So we don't-- instead, what do we do?
We do it cognitively.
We figure it out.
We think about it.
We think about it, with active, conscious, cognitive rules
of how you know a relative is.
And, of course, what we're going to see shortly
is, that's not really how it works, a lot of the time.
But, for a first pass, we do it cognitively.
So now you do it--
Instead of, this is someone who smells just
like my vaginal fluid, the way the goats are doing,
or, this is someone who I innately recognize as my child,
the way the rats are doing it, you're saying,
well, that's the baby I just gave birth to,
because they haven't taken him out of the room yet.
So that must be-- a cognitive strategy.
How do I know who the father is?
Not because I can smell in the baby's 50%
sharing their major histocompatibility gene.
This is the only person I had sex
with during the cycle that I conceived.
A cognitive strategy.
This is what humans do, again, [INAUDIBLE]
because we can think.
We can go through stuff like that.
We can also do other versions of it,
which is, well, this is someone who I saw mom give birth to.
Or at least when they took me out of the room,
and then they, like, gave me some stuffed animals to keep me
from, like, getting too upset.
And then they said, here's your new baby whatever.
Oh, OK.
Which is a variant on, this is someone
who's been around ever since I saw mom give birth
to that individual.
This is someone who looks like me.
This is someone who looks like a family member.
All of these cognitive strategies, going into that.
We think about it.
We think about it.
And, it turns out, we have brain mechanisms that
are good for doing that, too.
But we're not the only species that
thinks about it in that way.
For example, baboons-- wonderful study, a few years ago.
Baboons can do this with some sort of statistical thinking.
OK, baboons are polygamous.
Females will mate with a bunch of different males
during her cycle, and conceive, and thus it's not at all clear
who the father is.
But everybody there plays a guessing game.
And everybody does some statistics.
The usual rule is, baboons, being
a highly tournament species-- males do
no parental care of offspring.
Turns out that's not quite the case.
Some males do.
When they're pretty sure who their kid is.
And here's how it's done.
You are a baboon, and you are just hitting puberty.
You're female.
And what goes on is, for, like, your first half dozen cycles,
you're cycling but you're probably not ovulating yet.
You're not quite fertile.
This happens in humans, as well.
And none of the big, high-ranking guys
are terribly interested in you, probably because you're not
pumping out a whole lot of interesting pheromones yet.
So who do you wind up with?
You wind up with some poor, like, adolescent schnook
who has no chance to mate with anybody else.
And nobody's contesting his ability
to have a consortship with you.
So you do all of your mating with him.
The vast majority of the time, they're not fertile,
because you're not really ov--
Every now and then, though, you get
this, like, junior-high-school baboon
guy who gets his girlfriend pregnant,
and he's the only one.
And what tends to happen then is, when she gives birth,
he gives a fair amount of parental care to the offspring.
So what does he have as a rule, there?
If I'm the only one who mated with her--
if they're using a cognitive strategy-- then
I'll take care of the kid to some extent.
And it is a sight to behold, how incredibly inept
an adolescent male baboon is when
he's trying to be paternal.
But what you wind up seeing there is,
well, maybe he's imprinted.
Maybe he's doing major histocompatibility gene innate
stuff.
Or maybe he's actually thinking, hey, I was with her 24/7,
so it's gotta be me.
I'll take care of the kid.
Now you see the more complicated circumstance,
where it's a more desirable female-- more mature one--
where there will be a bunch of males contesting.
And what you will tend to see is, two days before
and after she ovulates, she'll be mating with number 10.
A day before and after, she's mating with number 3.
The day of ovulation, she's mating with number 1.
That tends to be the pattern.
Stay tuned.
It doesn't fit that perfectly, because female baboons also
have some opinions about who they want to mate with.
But, nonetheless, there winds up being
this pattern, just like that.
So there winds up being this pattern.
And thus-- you're the male, afterward,
when she gives birth, and you're trying to decide,
is this my kid?
Or, should I give some male parental investment?
And what is shown is, baboon males do statistics.
They do probability.
What they do is, if this was a male who
was mating during her prime ovulatory day,
he is more likely to take care of the kid
than a male who was mating during this window
or this window.
They are playing probability.
They're not very good at it-- no surprise.
But nonetheless this pattern emerges.
That's not innate recognition.
That's not innate recognition of some smell.
That's just thinking through it.
Was I with her?
Yeah, but she sure smelled a lot better the day after,
and that other guy was with her, so I
guess I'm in this category.
OK, well, I'll smile at the kid now and then tell him I
like their piano playing.
But I'm not going to, like, invest anything--
kind of stuff, there.
Here, you see a conscious, cognitive strategy.
So, OK, so us and other smart beasties like primates.
Here's another version of it, occurring in fish-- in sunfish.
And this was research done by that guy
David Sloan Wilson, that multilevel-selection-evolution
evolution guy, who actually has done research in, like,
so many different fields.
Incredibly creative guy.
Here's a study that he did.
Sunfish males, surprisingly, are quite
paternal in their taking care of their eventual offspring.
They're almost as good as Nemo's dad.
And what you've got there is, in this version, he--
I'm not going to draw fish mating.
Forget that!
OK.
So the guy mates with the female,
and she eventually gives birth to kids.
And he helps take care of them.
Now, instead, he mates with a female--
and you, the savagely heartless researcher,
puts him in the next tank over, where
he can see what's happening.
And you fiendishly, at that point,
drop down a clear plastic box right next to the female,
with another male in there!
In reality, he's not mating with the female,
but he's right there.
And this guy, who's stuck on the other side of the barrier
and going out of his mind with jealousy and petulance
and all of that immature stuff.
And what happens is, after she eventually
gives birth, she-- this apparently being the female,
in this diagram.
After she gives birth, he doesn't take care of the kids
as much.
There is no difference in any of the sensory cues.
Because he, in fact, is the only one who mated.
This one is kept inside.
There is some sort of cognitive stuff even going on in a fish.
Remarkable.
So it's not just us.
So we've got this broad realm-- innate strategies.
One's on very all-or-none sensory imprinting.
And then there's the folks who think through it.
We're in the mainstream of that, but we're not the only ones.
So how do our brains do that?
There is a part of the human cortex called the "fusiform
cortex."
And what it's good at is recognizing faces,
which is a remarkable thing.
It specializes in recognizing faces, facial expression,
degree of relatedness.
You show someone a good portrait of someone else,
and you will get that part of the brain
to activate as if it was their face.
You show a good cartoon of somebody.
It will do the same thing, maybe with a little bit
less confidence.
This is the specialized part of the cortex
that does facial recognition.
Remarkable.
You look at people with autism, and this part of the cortex
doesn't do a whole lot.
You show a nonautistic individual
a picture of a well-known loved one.
Fusiform cortex activates a whole lot.
You show them a picture of someone
they don't know a whole lot.
It activates somewhat to a lesser degree.
You show them a picture of an armchair.
Doesn't do anything at all.
You take someone who is autistic, and you show them,
and you get the same low-degree activation for all three.
You know, mother equals stranger equals armchair.
This in some ways is the core of what autism is about.
You see that going on, as played out in this part of the cortex.
So that's really interesting.
And then it turns out we're not the only species that
has this specialized fusiform cortex.
Primates have this, as well-- nonhuman primates.
Sheep have it, it turns out.
Pigeons who could recognize pictures of each other.
And why they would want to do that, god knows.
But pigeons have a very proto version of the fusiform cortex.
This seems to be part of what goes
into this conscious, cognitive strategizing of, this
is a face, this is a face I've seen
a whole lot more over the years.
So this activates a lot more.
This seems to suggest some sort of cortical specialization
for recognizing individuals.
More features of how humans do it.
Something that humans are very good at,
if they are human mothers, is recognizing
the smell of their baby right after birth.
And this has been shown to have a major histocompatibility
component to it.
In other words, that's not a purely cognitive strategy.
There's some innate, instinctual olfactory
signaling going on there.
So, a first bit of evidence is that we are not
just purely rational beasts at figuring out
who we're related to.
Babies, very shortly after birth,
are already spectacularly good at distinguishing the smell
of Mom versus somebody else.
How do you tell that with a baby?
You take a newborn baby, and you give them, like, on this side,
some armpit smell of Mom, and there's some armpit smell of,
you know-- I don't know-- Margaret Thatcher.
And what you see, then, is that the baby, the newborn,
is more likely-- will spend more time turning
its head towards Mom's smell.
That's how you know it.
Newborn babies cannot distinguish between the smell
of Dad and any other male.
It's not instinctual, in that case.
Newborn humans are doing some version of proximity to mom,
vaginal fluid smell-- whatever.
This seems to be bringing up a question of,
is there a difference in bonding in those early stages
between vaginal-birth offspring and cesareans?
I don't know, but that suggests that should be happening.
And maybe I should even find that out.
OK.
Other features of it.
Newborn kids, as we already know from a couple lectures ago,
can recognize the voice of Mom.
How?
From all that resonance, there, inside the amniotic fluid,
as Mom reads them War and Peace.
And, as we also heard, they can't
recognize the voice of Dad.
Not instinctual.
In this case, getting information
on the sensory route-- the amniotic environment
as a good resonator for Mom's voice.
So we're now already getting a mixture, here,
of some instinctual olfactory stuff,
major-histocompatibility-complex stuff, some acquired,
hardwired sensory-driven stuff.
Ooh, does this sound like the person whose voice I heard
for those last nine months?
And then some cognitive stuff-- trying to figure out
who this relative is.
Ooh, who did they come with to the party with?
All of that-- the cognitive stuff.
So, already a suggestion that we're not just
such pure cognitive machines.
So where is that most interesting?
And this is in a totally fascinating series
of studies that were done over the years,
showing just how little conscious cognition might
play out in us humans in some really critical realms.
Which is, who you decide you are interested in mating with.
OK, so how does that work in humans?
All sorts of different ways.
But here's one way in which it does something interesting.
And this was a classic study done by an anthropologist named
Joseph Schaeffer.
And this is what he did.
He studied people who grew up in Israel on kibbutzes.
Kibbutzes-- these are these traditional, socialist sort
of communes, where one of the-- none of them
are like this anymore.
But one of the early principles was, one parent
is as good as another parent.
All the kids are raised in these big, communal bathtubs
together.
And it's one big, sort of socialist [INAUDIBLE]
of everybody bathing naked together.
And what Schaeffer found was this very interesting thing.
Which is, you are brought up in your age group.
All the kids born this year are raised
in the same communal group.
And they take their baths together,
and they play together, and they've
got the same-- one parent takes all of them
for one afternoon, every Tuesday afternoon,
and the next one comes for the next shift.
And this big communal business, there.
And what Schaeffer discovered was,
if you were raised in the same age group as somebody,
anywhere up to six years of age, you never,
ever wind up marrying them.
And this was not with a sample-- an appropriate sampling.
This was a study he did of every individual who ever grew up
in the kibbutz system in Israel.
We appear to have a rule as follows.
If this is somebody who you spent a whole lot of time
with before six years of age, this
is someone who you sure don't want
to grow up and marry-- yuck!
And you love them-- they're incred--
but they feel like my sister.
They feel like my brother.
Whoa, that would be totally grotesque!
There has never been a case of people brought
up during the first-- grow up in your first six years of life,
taking a whole lot of baths with someone,
and you are not going to discover an amorous passion
for them when you're 20 years old.
They're going to feel like a sibling for you,
for the rest of your life.
What is that telling us?
We have a very noncognitive strategy in there.
Yes, who are relatives-- who are appropriate people
to mate with?
Well, if we know that this is the daughter of Mom's sister,
then this person is not appropriate,
and this whole cognitive-- spend a whole lot of time
naked with somebody, taking baths and playing pattycake
and counting their toes, the first six years of life,
they feel like a sibling.
Something very similar was then shown by Arthur Wolf,
here, in the Anthropology department--
a different cultural version.
Traditional Taiwanese marriages, where
there's some equivalent of that, and where either you wind up
with your future spouse at some insanely early age
and basically get brought up with them from infancy,
or it happens later.
And if you're brought up from infancy with them,
you have a disastrous marriage later on,
because they feel like a sibling for the rest of your life.
So what this shows us here is, yes, we
are these wonderful, rational, cognitive machines.
We've got all sorts of innate strategies
and sensory-imprinting stuff going on, instead, in us.
We are not a whole lot fancier than hamsters.
What does this set us up for?
A topic that's going to be real important when
we come to the lectures on aggression and cooperation
and competition and all of that.
Which is, if we spend a lot of our time figuring out
who we are related to-- cognitively--
or, even more importantly, if we are
malleable in the way these kids growing up in Taiwan,
or in these kibbutzes-- if we are
malleable in who we feel related to,
it is possible to manipulate us in lots of ways
to feel more related to individuals
than we actually are, or to feel less related to individuals.
And the terms for these are "pseudo kinship"
and "pseudo speciation."
And what we will eventually see is,
when you make sense of human violence and human cooperation
and human aggression and all of that,
we are so easily manipulated as to who counts as an "us"
and who counts as a "them."
And one of the brilliant things militaries all the world over
do, whether you're talking about clans with warrior classes
all the way up to sort of state militaries--
what you see in all these cases is a brilliant understanding
of how to make nonrelatives feel like they're a band of brothers
and how to make "them" seem so different they hardly
even count as humans.
So this ability for us to be manipulated
in these subliminal ways, as to who counts as a relative,
will come back to haunt us big-time
in making sense of a lot of human social behavior.
In other words, we are not purely rational.
OK.
So what we will do on Monday is switch another bucket, now,
to this field of ethology, which, once again, is trying
to make sense of, what behaviors are hardwired,
what does environment do?
You will see a completely different approach.
 Let's get started.
Let's see.
Once again, game plan for the coming week or so.
Next three lectures will be the TA overviews-- introductions
to nervous system, endocrinology.
Once again-- what I emphasized the other day is--
if you're not sure if you've got enough background exposure
to these topics for it to be worth coming,
I would suggest you assume that you don't.
Because it could do nothing more than
help, even if you've had a lot of this before.
Following that, some more advanced topics in the subject,
and then barreling on into the midterm.
OK.
Today we leap yet another discipline
into yet another one, this one being concerned with basically
the same exact issues that we've had before-- nature, nurture,
interaction, behavior.
And this one, as you will see, with a completely different
approach than all the prior ones.
Now the other day, when going through what heritability means
and doesn't mean, one of the key points that came out at the end
was that whole business of, the more different environments
you study something in, the lower your heritability term
is going to be.
So what's one of the punch lines that comes out of that?
If you want to understand the genetics of behavior,
you've got to go look at the behavior in lots
of different environments.
What today's discipline is about is
taking that one step broader.
If you want to understand anything
about the biology of behavior, number one,
you want to study it in lots of different environments.
Number two, you want to study it in as natural of environments
as possible.
And number three, go in there assuming
that you are going to have to translate a language.
The quote at the beginning there,
something to the effect of ethology,
the field we'll be looking at today.
Ethology is the process of interviewing an animal,
but in its own language.
So what we'll see here is this is
an expansion, in a certain way, on that notion that if you want
to understand behavior, get your animal out of the laboratory.
Now to begin to sort of appreciate
the context this has in history, we
start off-- God help us-- with history of psychology
at around 1900 or so.
When, universally agreed upon, the Grand Poobah of psychology
was William James.
And all I know about William James
is that he was highly philosophical,
and I fall asleep every time I try to read the guy.
But he dominated the period in a way in which psychology
was basically an introspective business that was
sort of a branch of philosophy.
And coming out in the decades after that
were the Young Turks of psychology,
who despised this whole approach, because they wanted
to make psychology a science-- a quantitative science,
an experimental science.
They wanted numbers.
Enough of this philosophy stuff.
And out of it came this very deep, deep reflexive distrust
of any behavior you couldn't see and you couldn't measure.
And you didn't want to know what was going on inside anybody's
personal life, inside their head,
whether they were a fish or a human.
All you were interested in is what
was going on in the outside world
just before that behavior occurred
and what behavior was it.
Simple organisms as input output black boxes.
Forget this philosophy stuff.
Give me something I can measure.
And this was this emerging discipline
of behaviorism, which became the dominant school
in American psychology by the middle of the last century.
We've already heard from one of the starting founding fathers
of it, and that was John Watson.
That was the guy from the first lecture-- give me
a kid from any background, and I'll
turn him into a butcher, baker, candlestick maker
sort of thing, and that everything could
be controlled in environment.
And thus, you could shape behavior
to any direction you want.
Behaviorism sort of hit its heyday, its absolute apogee,
with its most famous practitioner,
who was BF Skinner.
Skinner-- who dominated, I think, most studies show.
Or that he was the best known, most
cited psychologist throughout the middle part
of the last century.
Incredibly influential, and American psychology at the time
was all about behaviors.
What are the key features of it?
First one was this hysterical, radical, extreme
environmentalism.
The notion that we are all table rases, whatever that is.
That we are all blank slates and all that we come in with
is this blank slate to be written on by environment.
Don't tell me about genes.
Don't tell me about biology at all.
Don't tell me about anything other
than what's going on in the environment,
and how does that shape the behavior coming out
the other end, and can I measure it?
Extreme radical environmentalism in terms of gene environment.
There were no genes.
There were no interactions as far as they were concerned.
The next building principal was this notion
of reinforcement theory.
Let me control when any given organism receives
a positive reinforcement, a reward.
Let me control when it receives a negative reinforcement
of punishment.
Give me the ability to control those in the environment,
and I will produce any behavior you want in that organism.
Once again, whether it is a fish or a human and everything
in between, this utter reliance on behavior
is shaped by the rewards and punishments of environment.
Reinforcement theory.
The final piece of it was this notion of universality.
Which is, it works this way in everybody!
It works this way in every single species out there.
And if you want to study lab rats,
you're going to learn the exact same thing as
if you were studying giraffes.
But it's a lot harder to study them in a lab.
You sure don't need to study them out
in their natural habitat, because it's just understanding
the reinforcements coming in, the behavior coming out
the other end.
They're all the same.
This period dominated by the behaviorists
was, historically, a total drag.
Because these guys had just a stranglehold on the field.
And all of them, like, looked the same.
If you ever look in one of those time-life books
on the history of the mind or whatever,
there will be the inevitable picture
of BF Skinner with some pigeon.
And Skinner was like your archetypal
out-of-central-casting behaviors.
He had this inordinately shiny forehead and these big glasses.
And every picture of him, for some reason,
photographers were always forced to kneel down and take
a picture of him looming over with his pigeon.
And everything considered, this was an incredibly frightening
looking man.
And he would then be free to go on with astonishing quotes
like, dog, cat, rat, child, doesn't matter.
It's all the same.
This notion of universality of behaviorism.
And Skinner invented all sorts of Utopian societies--
one, a book of his that was very influential,
a novel called Walden Two.
You can build a perfect world out of reinforcement theory
all with environmentalism.
And I could have built the exact same utopia
studying this with grasshoppers as with humans-- boy, cat, dog,
rat, whatever.
They're all the same.
So the building of American behaviorism-- utter reliance
on environmentalism, utter reliance on the notion that all
of behavior could be explained-- could
be shaped by the rewards and punishments,
the positive and negative reinforcements of environment.
And this works the same way in every single type of animal
out there, so you might as well just study it in a rat,
in a pigeon.
Those were the two backbones of behaviorist research.
Because they're a lot more convenient.
And you can study it in the lab, because it's
the exact same thing.
It is purely a function of the environment you're controlling.
And you understand that.
And as long as there is some behavior coming out
the other end that you could measure and generate numbers,
you are doing scientific psychology,
and this is what the whole field was about.
Meanwhile, over in Europe, there was a totally different
tradition emerging.
And what it has its greatest similarities to is--
you know, you read any of these books
on the history of evolution, and there's always
this phase of like all of these 19th century
British naturalists, where like half of them
were Parsons in some Anglican church or whatever.
They always had to be Parsons.
And they would always be out trumping
around the woods of England with a butterfly net.
And these were the guys who would come back
with a gazillion different types of butterflies.
This is when butterfly collecting
became this obsession with like British, upper middle class
and Parsons and stuff who would just go out in the country.
And what would you do?
You would come back, and you would generate these whatevers
of all the different types of butterflies and just wallow
in the variability.
That was the main thing of it.
Look at all these different colors.
Look at all these different shapes of wings.
The interpretation at the time of course was, look at all
this glorious variability of life
and God's work showing in it.
But the main thing emotionally that these guys were about
was variety-- the range of differences,
the range of different ways that species could look like.
And what this new field was emerging in Europe
was ethology.
What ethology was about was the same exact emotional pulse
as in those 19th century Parsons with the butterfly nets.
But what ethologists would do is go out and collect behaviors.
And they would come back, and they would just wallow and just
be buoyant by all of the different types
of behavioral variety.
And that's the most important thing.
So we can see right off the bat, they
are not going to be getting along very
well with the behaviorists-- with the rat equals boy
equals hippo business there.
Because what these guys were all about
was just the sheer variety of behavior and, implicit in that,
how you have to study it in natural environments.
So there were three guys during this period,
beginning work early in the 20th century, who
were the official godfathers of the whole field of ethology.
One was Niko Tinbergen. Next was Konrad Lorenz.
The next was Hugo Von Frisch.
And these were the big three.
They eventually got their Nobel prizes.
And Tinbergen was basically a saint, an incredibly sort
of accomplished, interesting man who
did all sorts of extraordinarily good things.
Konrad Lorenz, as we know, was Nazi scum.
And Hugo Von Frisch was just really, really, really old.
Somehow he was just really old from the very beginning.
And he was about 89 when he got his Nobel price.
These were the starting three that began the whole field.
So we've got our archetypal behaviorist villains there
with their shiny foreheads leaning over the camera guy
and waving pigeons at them.
And what are the ethologists about?
All of them were guys with these knobby knees and very
hairy legs, with big thick old hiking boots covered
in mud and alpine whatevers.
And what they were doing was just
tromping around in the outside world collecting behaviors,
just looking at the sheer variety.
OK.
It's obvious which team I'm rooting for here.
But even, you know, that they hung out with Konrad Lorenz.
OK.
The ethologists are much more nuanced--
the much broader, much more multi-faceted,
diverse view of life there.
The ethologists, completely unconnected with behaviorism
in the United States.
Instead, we're developing this whole field
premised on all sorts of very different notions.
Behaviorists, this radical environmentalism.
What ethology was about, from day one,
was gene environment interactions--
behaviorist rules of positive negative reinforcement.
That explains the entire world.
As we'll see, some of the most amazing things ethologists
came up with were examples of animals acquiring
new behaviors that broke every rule on earth of behaviorism
about how learning occurs.
Finally, over there with the behaviorists,
with their universality-- cat equals hippo--
and what the ethologists were about was,
every species solves its environmental challenges,
and its history of evolutionary challenges, in a unique way.
And out of that came Tinbergen's famous quote.
Which is, again, ethology is the study of animal behavior,
but where you're interviewing the animal in its own language.
And the whole premise of ethology
was, that's preferable, and that's
not going to happen unless you're
out there in the nature in the animal's real habitat.
And you better be real open minded
as to what counts as communication, as what
counts to be the animal's language that you
are talking to it with.
One example of this.
And this was somewhat of a different discipline,
but in the 1960s, there was this very interesting sort
of cottage industry of research that came out.
Which is, you take a normal lab rat.
And now what you do instead is put it
in an enriched environment.
You put it in a big enclosure with lots
of other rats and beeping toys and interesting smells and cell
phones and all sorts of sounds of that sort.
And what they would show was landmark-- take a rat
and put it in an enriched environment
and-- in 1960s neurobiology, of a type we've
heard about already-- you get a thicker cortex.
People went wild over that in terms
of enriching the environment.
This prompted a gazillion studies
during the '60s built around this very Great Society '60s
optimism about things.
The Head Start program emerged during that period
out of a demonstration that all sorts of privations
in various points of life, early in life,
could be buffered, reversed, by the right sort
of enriched environments.
Incredibly influential.
Billions of studies done.
And hidden away in the literature
was one very interesting study.
Which is, when you took these enrichment sort of Poobahs
there-- and now, what they did in this one study
was they studied wild rats.
And they brought in wild rats.
And what they saw was, even without the enrichment--
you didn't need to do a thing about enrichment.
You take the best environmental enrichment laboratory paradigm
to get you the thickest cortex around,
and it's not going to be as thick as in a wild rat.
And these guys were not-- these guys were not ethologists,
but this is exactly the sort of thing
that ethology is built around.
You were not going to be seeing normal behavior in a cage,
looking at a rat in there.
That's like studying dolphins swimming in a bath tub.
You are going to be missing everything under those.
And, whoa, there is stuff going on out there.
If a wild rat has a thicker cortex
than we know how to come up with,
we need to be studying animals in their natural setting.
OK.
So that was their basic sort of call to arms.
What ethologists worked out were a number
a very clear experimental approaches built
around a whole bunch of the W questions-- who, and what,
and where, and why, or whatever it is we did in fifth grade.
Here's what they looked at.
They looked at, first, what was the behavior?
What was the behaviors?
We'll see they had a certain jargony term for it--
fixed action patterns.
And what we'll see about it is this
is a very specific realm of types of behavior
that had a very interesting subtle relationship with things
like instinct.
Next.
What in the outside world triggered
that behavior to occur?
And their jargon stuff, terminology--
what was the environmental releasing stimulus that
caused this fixed action pattern to come out?
Next.
Dramatically different from where the behaviorists were--
what's going on in that organism's head
so that that releasing stimulus triggers the fixed action
pattern to occur?
What are the intervening mechanisms?
What are the innate releasing mechanism,
was the jargon they came up with.
Very jargony, middle European stuff.
But what's going on in an animal's head?
What's the behavior?
What triggered it outside there?
What's the machinery that took that releasing stimulus
in the environment and turned it into the behavior?
And finally, a realm which connects them
with evolution type people, what's the value?
What's the adaptive value of that behavior?
And what we'll see is that question
meant an utterly different world to ethologists than it
did to evolution people.
OK.
So starting off, those fixed action patterns.
Fixed action patterns, when you first
begin to learn how ethologists thought about it,
you immediately sense they're talking about instincts.
They're talking about reflexes.
They were definitely not.
And terms like instinct had incredibly dirty connotations
among psychologists and animal behaviorists around that time,
just because, like an earlier period, animals,
humans had instincts for maternal behavior,
and instincts for inevitable aggression,
and instincts for entrepreneurship,
and instincts for-- and it was a totally meaningless term,
because it described anything that you wanted
to say was something that's supposed to happen
and that I'm good at doing.
What you had instead, in their view,
was something much more subtle.
A fixed action pattern is not maternalism.
A fixed action pattern is not entrepreneurship.
A fixed action pattern is a relatively tractable piece
of behavior involving a bunch of interconnected muscles
and producing this characteristic behavior which
had a meaning to it.
OK.
Nice and abstract.
We will see example shortly.
But what they also had, that separated it from instincts
by miles and miles, was animals didn't
have to learn how to do it.
It was hardwired, but animals had
to learn how to do it better.
And that was an amazing insight in terms of gene environment
interactions.
The word gene was not appearing in their thinking at the time.
But fixed action patterns.
In other words, experience could change
the way you do the fixed action pattern.
Or, already harking back to the molecular lecture
and that obsession with if/then clauses, what experience mostly
would do is not so much change the nature of the fixed action
pattern but change the context.
Teaching you when to do it, when not to.
If/then clauses of, if this environmental event
is happening, then bring out this cohesive set
of behaviors that have at least some superficial resemblance
to instinct but doesn't hold up for long.
This was really important.
OK.
So what would be examples?
What does this look like-- a behavior where animals simply
know how to do it without learning, without experience?
And they can do it right from the start
and nonetheless experience shapes that.
Obviously, first example was all of Charlotte's babies
knowing how to say salutations within a few seconds of being
born there.
And no doubt they would soon learn who not to say that to.
Classic example.
And this was one that Lorenz studied for years
and always wanted to have the pig killed because Nazi scum.
OK.
But anyway, I digress.
And other examples.
You take a squirrel.
You take a squirrel that's been raised in a cage
without ever seeing another squirrel-- a squirrel that
has subsisted on nothing but a liquid diet
and that kind of thing.
And give it a nut, and it will know how to crack it.
It will know to carry out this fixed action pattern.
This is not an instinct for food acquisition.
This is something instinctual for how you hold this thing
and where you chew on it or whatever
it is that squirrels do.
It's in there.
The squirrel doesn't have to learn how to do it.
But what you see is, you take that squirrel
without any prior experience with nut cracking,
and you look at them over time, and they get better at it!
They do it faster.
They get a larger percentage of whatever's inside there.
They have a basic, hardwired fixed action pattern--
a bunch of coordinated muscles doing a coherent set behavior,
and it is shaped by experience.
In this case, they learn how to do it better.
Another example.
This is one where you have any of those intro psych books
from anywhere in 1950s, '60s or so,
and there was this inevitable picture where
you had-- it was this room.
There was this surface, and it had a checkerboard linoleum
on it.
And the surface came to around here,
and then it dropped down about three feet
and then continued the same on the bottom.
It was always the same checkerboard linoleum.
Linoleum which was like worth its weight in gold at the time.
Linoleum which was going to make life better for everyone.
So you had this checkered linoleum thing there.
And the critical thing was right around here.
When the wall dropped down, right here
was a sheet of glass that continued out there.
In other words, the actual floor would continue here
on the glass, while it was also dropping down to this.
And what was always in one of those pictures
would be some adorable, cute baby animal sitting out there
on the glass, totally freaking out.
Because it's out there, and it's looking way down there,
and there's stuff-- a yawning chasm below of three feet--
and you are eliciting what was called a visual cliff response.
Which is, get me out of here!
I'm floating up in the air here.
You did not have to have animals who already had experience
by trial and error learning that when
you're floating in the air, that tends not to last for long.
And you go to [INAUDIBLE] afterward.
There was no-- it's there in the first place.
You take a baby dog.
You take a baby human.
You take a baby blue whale, whatever.
And you push them out on the glass there,
and they look down, and they totally freak out.
Unless they're a baby sloth.
Oh!
Isn't that kind of interesting?
Because if you're a baby sloth who gets freaked out
by yawning space underneath you, you
are not going to be a very functioning
sloth when you grow up there.
Oh, species specific fixed action patterns. ,
Where in this case, this visual cliff could evoke this whole
fixed action pattern of panic responses, all of that.
So where does the learning come in?
You push this poor animal out there enough
times-- the 40th time, the elephant's out there,
and it begins to learn.
I don't know what's up with this,
because this gravity business is making sense otherwise.
But it seems to be OK when I'm out here.
You could habituate the visual cliff response.
But all sorts of animals-- except for arboreal ones
hanging up there-- all sorts of species
didn't have to have prior experience with not liking
to drop down open spaces.
It was there already.
They learn the context better.
Another example of this that the ethologists showed.
These were with captive primates.
You take a monkey who was raised in isolation,
who has never seen another monkey,
and at some point in adolescence.
It's a male monkey.
And you sit him down, and you show him a film.
And the film consists of the face
of a huge, scary male monkey of the same species giving
a threatening display, which is usually
displaying the canines there.
And this is a monkey who has no prior experience with monkeys.
It has never seen a monkey before.
All of its interactions have been with Barney or whatever,
knows nothing about any of this.
And you show it that, and it will freak out and give
a fixed action pattern-- a subordinate gesture
crouching down and not making eye contact.
Whoa!
Where'd that come from?
No learning from trial and error.
It was simply there as a fixed action pattern--
a whole bunch of things that the monkey
does with its torso, its face, all of that.
Where does experience come in?
The monkey needs to learn that you give a subordinating
gesture like that to some big, scary animal,
you don't give it to infants.
It needs to learn the right social context.
So that's where it comes in.
So you've got all these examples of behaviors that are
hardwired, whatever that means.
And what you have, nonetheless, is shaping by experience.
And this is what the ethologists learned.
And what was clear after awhile was all sorts of animals
already knew all about ethology.
They understood what a fixed action pattern was.
As follows.
Type of monkey in East Africa called vervet monkeys.
If you were a vervet monkey, there are three things on Earth
that terrify you.
One is a leopard.
Another is a snake, and the third is an eagle.
Leopards come from below.
Snakes come from below.
Eagles come from above.
And what you have in vervet monkeys
are fixed action patterns of alarm calls
that they give when spotting one of the predators.
They have different alarm calls for each of the species.
And what has been shown is, you fly over
the silhouette of a perfectly nice bird there
that's not going to try to carry it away,
and you don't elicit it.
It's not just things going on up there.
It's a fixed action pattern for scary, terrifying stuff up
above verses scary, terrifying stuff below with four legs,
versus scary, terrifying below with no legs at all.
And they all know how to do this without prior experience.
But what goes on is the same thing
that makes it a fixed action pattern, which
is it can be sculpted by experience.
What am I saying here?
Which is, you are a young vervet monkey,
and you've got these fixed action patterns.
That's great!
What you have to learn how to do, though, is not screw up
and say, oh my god, there's an eagle, when you actually should
be saying, there's a leopard.
Because if you say, there's an eagle,
everyone's going to run down the tree.
And if you say, there's a leopard,
everybody's going to run up the tree!
And you get some kid who gets it backwards,
and that's going to have some bad consequences.
How do you know adult vervet monkeys have studied ethology
and fixed action patterns?
Because they don't listen to the kid
until some adult agrees with them, because they know
this is some dumbass kid that doesn't know the language yet
very well and makes mistakes.
Under a certain age, adult vervets
don't respond to alarm calls other than with vigilance,
trying to figure out what the kid's talking about,
until it is seconded by an adult.
So what about fixed action patterns in humans?
Classic example-- infant smiling,
involving all sorts of muscles that who
knows what's involved in them?
All sorts of muscles that produce this
without prior experience.
How do you know?
Fiberoptic mysteries show that fetuses
smile at various points.
What else?
You will see smiling in blind babies.
So there's no visual information coming in.
What's smiling?
It's a fixed action pattern.
Where's the learning?
Learning who to smile at.
Learning that mannequins aren't going to smile back
at you and things of that sort.
That's it being shaped by experience.
More fixed action patterns.
Infants are not having to have trial and error experience
with learning there's this thing you do with your mouth right
after you're born that keeps you from being really, really
hungry, and it's called nursing.
Oh, can somebody demonstrate that for me?
That's a fixed action pattern.
What happens is, kids get more and more efficient at it--
the number of calories they can consume per unit of time.
They get better at doing it.
More fixed action patterns in humans.
Every culture on earth, people raising their eyebrows
and greeting to somebody.
Every culture on earth, people can
recognize what anger looks like, what fear looks like,
what disgust, what contempt, all of those.
These are all fixed action patterns.
And where does the context come in?
With all of them obviously learning when you interpret
this as good news, bad news.
When you pretend you don't see it, all of that.
Learning the social context.
So humans are absolutely full of fixed action patterns.
Next, the next sort of question that the ethologists would
ask after getting to this point of,
what's the behavior-- what does learning have to do with it?
And now asking the question-- the same one
the evolutionary folks would ask-- which is, well,
what's the benefit of it?
What's the adaptive value?
And a totally different way of thinking about it
than the evolution people.
The evolution folks going on with adaptive value,
which is it allows you to pass on more copies of your genes.
And over the generations, the prevalence of that trait
becomes more common.
What the ethologists did instead were experiments.
They simply went and experimented to see what
this information-- what these fixed action
patterns-- actually meant.
So Tinbergen was famous for one of those.
Which was there was like some gull something or other
that he would study, and the outside of gull eggs
were all speckled.
And there would be this very distinctive fixed action
pattern shortly after the chicks pop out,
which is mom would go around systematically turning over
all the fragments of egg where the white of egg shell--
where the white was facing up-- and would turn it
over so that the speckled part was facing up.
Whoa!
That's an interesting behavior.
Does that make that gull more attractive to males
and thus pass on more copies of her genes?
But, no, here's what Tinbergen does.
He goes in with these gulls who just finished doing it
and with her new pups, chicks-- her new chicks
just having hatched.
And she goes off to get them food or whatever.
And this total vicious, heartless Tinbergen sneaks in,
and he turns the shells back over to white.
And what happens?
All sorts of raptors flying around up
there are better at spotting down there that there's
all these baby chicks, who are gone by the time mom
comes back.
Tragically.
I know!
And I'm complaining about Lorenz?
[LAUGHTER]
OK.
But that's showing, oh, why do gull mothers, shortly
after giving birth, go through this interesting collection
of motoric movements which they don't have to learn how to do,
flipping these things over?
Does this make their groups better
to out-compete those with the next Ice Age comes?
No.
It's because you turn it over so that some predator
up there in the sky can't see the egg
shells-- the adaptive value.
Next.
Next example of this-- and this is
like one of the most famous, iconic sort of stories
to come out of ethology-- this was
the work of Von Frisch showing bee dancing, bee communication.
And what bees are about is-- they're scary,
and they go find out about food sources.
And they fly back to their colony.
And what they need to do is communicate to everybody else
that they have found a food source.
And they have to communicate all sorts of types of information.
Which direction?
How far?
How much?
Is it totally exciting, or is it, I just stumbled
into a little bit?
And what Von Frisch was able to work out
was bees came back and did this fixed action pattern
movement which has been seen in every bee species on Earth.
Which is, they do this figure eight, a waggle dance.
They're shaking their rear back and forth.
And they're moving over the floor
of the hive, where everybody is watching and cheering them
on, and going around and doing this figure eight.
And what is this about?
What is this about?
Von Frisch was able to dissect it,
and with brilliant, experimental tricks showing the bee
was giving three pieces of information.
The axis of the figure eight told the bees,
with respect to sunlight, which direction
to go to find the source.
The longer the bee danced, the further away the food source
was.
And the more frantically it was wiggling its rear around,
the more exciting of a food source it was.
This was information.
This was what's the adaptive value.
So Von Frisch is sitting there saying, well, I
think it might mean this, because I'm finding
this interesting pattern.
I may speculate.
What do you do?
You do an experiment instead.
Which is, now you take a beehive,
and you put it on a bar stool thing.
And it's sitting out there in the field,
and you grab some bee.
And I don't know how he did it, but he lived to a ripe old age.
But you grab a bee, and you give it some amazing food
source out here, and you let it fly back to the hive
where it goes berserk with the waggle dance stuff,
telling everybody there's something amazing over there.
Meanwhile, Von Frisch, in his hiking boots,
is slithering on his belly towards the beehive
with the piano stool, and comes up underneath it,
and rotates it-- rotates it 180 degrees.
And what happens then?
Everybody in the hive comes barreling out
and goes in the wrong direction!
Because they were given directions
as to where to go with respect to the hive's entrance.
That's how you show it actually contained information.
And then he would have the food source closer or further,
and show the length of the dancing
and all sorts of other cruel things
he would do to the hive to confuse them and wipe out
the credibility of that one bee.
But this is how you get the information.
He would show this explicitly-- oh,
why do they do this fascinating fixed action pattern?
Because they're telling them something!
And here's how you prove it.
And you rotate it around.
So you can begin to see the ethologists were really
good, clever experimentalists.
And they were just trying to do it
in the animal's own language.
This became really clear when you study their next category
of questions-- that business of, well, what
is it that just happened in the outside world that
triggered this fixed action pattern to occur?
What was the sensory trigger?
Their jargon-- what was the releasing stimulus?
And they had general strategies for doing this.
OK.
You were speculating that this site
is the thing that triggers whatever
this behavior in this animal.
How do you begin to test it?
Let's remove the-- OK, enough with the abstract stuff.
Baby birds-- baby gulls or something--
peck at mom's mouth, at her beak.
And that is meant to get mom to regurgitate some exciting food.
How do they know how to do this?
What is it that gets them to do this behavior?
On mom's beak, there's a little red circle.
And the early ethologists noting that, oh,
that's kind of interesting.
I wonder if they're looking at the red circle there?
I wonder if that's the thing that's causing
them to start this behavior?
What were the experimental techniques for saying, oh,
is a red circle on mom's beak a releasing stimulus
for this fixed action pattern of pecking?
Let's do an experiment.
And the standard experimental models
they would have would be to subtract out the thing that you
think is the stimulus.
Take mom and white out her little red circle
there and see if the kids no longer peck.
Replacement.
Which is, now you've done that to mom.
And you draw a little red circle back,
and you see if they start pecking again.
Replacement substitution.
Now you take something completely different.
You put some neon triangle on mom's beak,
and you see if you will elicit the same-- oh, what's
the specificity of it?
Finally, the thing that they really
specialized in-- which is now you
would do what they called super stimulation.
Which is, you wave a piece of paper in front of the chick
there-- that you've drawn a gigantic red circle on--
and you see if it goes out of its mind and pecks at it
like there's no tomorrow.
Experimental approaches like this.
If you take away this thing, does the fixed action pattern
no longer occur?
If you put it back, does it work again?
If you replace it with something else,
if you exaggerate the traits, do you
get even more of the behavior?
These were the standard approaches
for figuring this out.
And ethology types who were interested
in this realm of releasing stimuli,
the thing they have gotten incredible mileage out
of recent years is making little robotic animals.
Because you could program to do certain behaviors,
and you could see if you could elicit everybody else
to respond to the behaviors.
And, of course, the first ones were all sorts
of techie folks building robotic bees who could
dance in certain dimensions.
And they would stick him in there
and wind up the gear shaft thing.
And they would just dance away, and they
could get the other bees to go flying off
someplace-- the bees not being very discriminating as
to which dancers they pay attention to.
But the point there was, this was a substitution--
a mechanical substitution for that releasing stimulus.
Or there's some amazing paper a couple years ago,
where somebody made a robotic cockroach
and was able to trick all the other cockroaches into doing
some sort of imprudent behavior.
And so you see this is high tech versions of this approach.
Oh, it might be this stimulus that's-- let's replicate it.
Let's make it even more exciting.
So using this approach, the ethologists
would begin to figure out, what is it
in the sensory world of this animal that caused that fixed
action pattern to occur?
And it was never more than in this domain
that they were doing that whole sound byte about interviewing
an animal in its own language.
Because what it's all about is recognizing other species out
there are functioning in sensory modalities
we can't even guess at.
What they began to see.
One example-- the sorts of auditory stimuli
that would trigger fixed action patterns.
One example-- deer moose.
Big things.
What are they called?
Elk!
Elk!
Is elk a female name for-- bulls.
OK.
So you get Bullwinkles there.
And what he's doing is he is trying to find a mate.
And how does he do it?
What they do, when they use northern Minnesotan beasts,
is they bellow.
They give these bellowing calls that
are heard for miles and miles.
Male deer-- I guess it's deer.
OK.
They bellow.
It could be heard miles away.
And if you were the right kind of female,
and you hear some guy bellowing in the next valley,
do you know what you do?
You ovulate.
Auditory induced ovulation.
And not only that, you begin to go try to find the guy.
And when you get there, you start this whole
courting display thing, if he's the right kind of guy
and he expresses himself.
And what you have there is-- what's the releasing stimulus?
An auditory one.
Even more bizarre-- discovering that rats,
rats are responsive to certain types of stimuli.
For example, you tickle them on their rib cage,
and they giggle.
Yes!
Your tax dollars going on that that could instead be spent
on nuking something or other.
What you've got there is rats giggle.
They giggle in an ultrasonic range.
So you can't hear it until you've got some rat giggle
decoder thing.
And they giggle in response to logical things.
Like you tickle them, and they giggle.
And then they come back for more.
And you show all those patterns with it.
And if you get it at the right frequency only,
and they do this giggling chirping thing,
and you're releasing that there, and other rats
come over to check it out.
Because the sound-- the auditory releasing stimulus,
in this case of rat chirping giggling-- induces this,
whoa, let's go see where the party
is response in the other rats.
Another example of this-- interesting thing
that you see in various species, including
humans-- which is when females are ovulating,
their voices go a little higher.
And studies showing that males subliminally can detect this.
More evidence of modality supplying information we
would never even guess at.
OK.
Then you can show releasing stimuli in the visual domain.
And one example of this is that you have turkeys,
and turkeys apparently do their sexual attraction stuff
visually.
And this prompted one of the cruelest, most savage studies
I've ever seen, which is trying to figure out
what is it that makes female turkeys
attractive to male turkeys.
And what they did was, they would show the male,
and they studied his behavior for a long period.
And the scientists began to guess
at what were the releasing stimuli, the visual information
from the female, that would elicit this behavior?
So they did the subtraction substitution technique.
They made themselves an artificial female turkey.
They took a big old ball of Styrofoam,
and they stuck this fake turkey head on at one end.
And they stuck a bunch of feathery things
at the other end and just stuck it out there in the field.
And, of course, the idiot male turkeys
instantly are like all around the thing and courting it.
And all, oh.
So interesting visual stimuli.
What about it actually attracts the male?
And here's where the cruelty came in.
They would begin to mess with the artificial females.
And I once saw a film of this.
And like the empathy you feel for this poor turkey guy there.
Because they have a-- and he comes in there,
and they've got the Styrofoam female with this stuff there,
and he's courting it and having a great time.
And now they put him back there, and they
do something or other there.
And he comes out, and the back feathers
are kind of perpendicular to the head.
And that doesn't-- so you see he sort of stops there and kind
of circles around for a bit.
But, being a male, he decides what the hell
and starts courting the thing.
Then they put him back in the room there.
And now they let him out.
And the tail and the head are on the same side.
He stands there, looking a little more confused,
before starting to court the thing.
Put him away, come back in, and the head is over there,
and the feathers are there, and the Styrofoam ball.
And you see he's kind of like looking around
and goes up to this and-- well, that's not going to work--
and goes over to the next one.
And you're seeing what the information-- can you
believe how cruel this was?
You could begin to see this sort of information-- what
were the building blocks of that visual releasing stimulus--
in order to find out about that.
Then there is, not surprisingly, a whole world
of olfactory releasing stimuli.
And we won't spend any time on that
here, because all that stuff is going
to come big time in the lectures on sexual behavior--
pheromones, information that triggers behaviors,
sexual behaviors in all sorts of species, including humans.
Olfactory information.
One example with humans, which was
this very cool study that was published a couple of months
ago.
What you need is sweat from terrified people.
So here's what you do.
You throw somebody out of an airplane
who's never parachuted before.
And the whole thing is, I guess you
can do your first jump in tandem with the instructor who's
attached to you and who knows what to do.
The instructor who's doing all the physical work
while you're just there attached to them being scared out
of your pants.
Then you get a control group-- a control group
who, instead, have generated stress sweat on an exercise
bicycle.
Totally fine.
So quick, you get the guys lying down in the field.
They're hyperventilating.
You run at them with cotton swabs,
and push his armpits into it, and get some of his sweat,
and seal it away.
And then you get the person on the bicycle,
and you get some of their sweat.
And now you sit down people, and you
let them smell the two sources.
Objectively, people cannot distinguish between them.
Put the person in a brain scanner,
and give them the odors.
And if they're smelling the sweat from the terrified
person, their amygdala activates.
Not if you smell the sweat from the other individual.
And not only that, you now show them
faces where the facial expression is ambiguous.
It's been sort of merged halfway between a scared appearance
and a happy one, between different facial expressions.
And you get somebody after they've
smelled the scared sweat, and they interpret
faces as more frightened.
Whoa!
Smells?
The smells of people's armpits and whether they were terrified
or not changes how your brain is working
and changes how you judge pictures of facial expressions.
We've got stuff going on in all sorts of sensory domains
that we can't even begin to guess at.
Showing this even more, other species where you go into stuff
we don't even know about.
Electric fish.
You want to understand releasing stimuli for electric fish,
you've got to understand electricity,
and how they sing to each other in electric fish songs,
and how they-- where is that coming from?
Oh, right, they're singing to each other in electricity.
And, yes, you get territorial songs.
You get specific ones.
You get males who are courting the same female,
trying to jam each other's frequencies.
This actually is demonstrated quite readily.
You see relatedness of frequency patterns between siblings.
They're going about this with electricity.
Whoa!
What is happening in the outside world
there that we haven't a clue at interviewing
an animal in its own language?
Vibration.
All sorts of insects communicate with each other by vibrating.
Arachnids, there's all sorts of things where they communicate--
I don't know what they want to talk about--
but by vibrating a web.
They can produce distinctive patterns of it,
which sends information.
And oh, OK, weirdo insects and spiders and stuff.
Really interesting work done in recent years,
by somebody who used to be here on campus named Caitlin
O'Connell-Rodwell, looking at elephants.
And it turns out elephants have all sorts
of interesting pressure transducer receptor
little corpuscle thingies in their feet.
Nobody else has stuff like that in their feet among mammals.
These are things that are supposed to be
in other parts of the body.
You don't see them at the bottom of your feet.
And what are these about?
When an elephant walks, it's causing tiny, tiny bits
of vibration in the ground that could be picked up
hundreds of yards away.
And what she has shown experimentally
is elephants can communicate with each other with vibration
through their feet.
And she has done some brilliant classical ethology studies
of manipulating it and seeing if you could change the elephant.
They're talking to each other with vibration.
All of this very, very different than we would guess.
Tactile stimulation.
And out of this came one of the iconic experiments and one
we will come back to lots in lecturers to come.
This one you've also seen every single intro textbook
out there, which is the surrogate mother monkeys.
You got the monkey who's raised in social isolation,
and all he's got are two surrogate moms to choose from.
And one has this chicken wire tube torso
thing with this little unconvincing Styrofoam
head put on top.
And the other one is wrapped in this nice, warm, terry cloth
around its chicken wire torso, with a head on top.
What's the difference?
The first one, the chicken wire one,
has a bottle of milk sticking out.
That one supplies milk, supplies calories.
This one supplies warmth.
And in the mid-1950s, you would ask somebody, well,
why do babies like their mothers?
Because their mothers positively reinforce them with milk,
says BF Skinner, who clearly knows endlessly about that.
What is bonding between mother and child about?
It's about the mother meeting the caloric and temperature
needs of a child.
By reinforcing the child with milk now and then,
the child becomes attached.
And this is what dominated in the field.
OK.
Nice, abstract question.
Interesting realm where it had an implication-- you take
an infant, you take a very young child,
and you put him in a pediatric ward
for a couple of weeks because of some illness.
And what's the philosophy at the time,
derived from hard-nosed behaviorism?
It would say, dog equals cat equals monkey.
It would say, one person with a bottle of milk
equals another person equals another.
Parents, they don't know the routines here.
They never wash their hands enough.
So what we're going to do, what was standard practice
in pediatric wards at the time, was
parents were allowed to visit 30 minutes a week.
And otherwise, all of the care was provided
by people working there.
And eventually, the best thing ever
came along that would make any behaviorist delighted.
You could do things with infants, keeping them going,
without even being touched by human beings.
Someone modified chicken egg incubators
and invented human incubators.
And an entire just grotesque literature
shows the more incubators a hospital had,
the shorter the life expectancy was of infants
who came in in their ward.
But that was the dominant notion at the time.
What do infants like about mom?
She gets calories.
She gives them calories.
So OK.
So you've got the baby monkey there.
And she's got two moms to choose from-- the one that gives milk,
and the one that has the terry cloth with the tactile stuff.
And which one is she going to cling to?
It's clear, if you had BF Skinner in there,
he'd be up there nursing on the milk bottle
within a couple of seconds.
But what does the baby do instead?
Which one does it bond to?
The warm, terrycloth mother.
Ah.
Love has so much more to do than just calories,
and adequate clothing, and a vaccine every now and then.
This was a study by a man named Harry Harlow which
transformed-- began to get people to think utterly
differently about the nature of bonding.
We will hear tons about that work down the line.
So tactile stuff.
Finally, what is the realm of the most brilliant combination
of various releasing stimuli triggering fixed action
patterns out the wazoo?
What baby animals look like in every species
out there short of crocodiles and snakes.
All the baby animals and all the different species
have the little short muzzles, and the big round
eyes, and the big shiny forehead,
and the big ears sticking out there,
and maybe a distinctive coloration
that sets them off different from mom, from adults.
And every species, you take some incredibly cute baby monkey,
and polar bears are going to say, oh, look how cute!
And their eyes are going to dilate, their pupils,
and you are going to elicit cute responses.
The term, this set of fixed action patterns
that people and all sorts of species
do in response to the releasing stimuli of a cute baby.
And, I kid you not, the early generations
of Disney illustrators studied this.
They studied what it is that makes baby faces baby.
And an amazing paper, classic one by Stephen Jay Gould,
talking about Mickey Mouse, the evolution of Mickey Mouse.
If you go back to when Mickey Mouse started off
in, I don't know, the 1920s or so,
his name was Steamboat Willie.
And he was this rat.
He was this like skinny, angular, ectomorph rat
thing with five fingers.
And he was basically sort of this double entendre-ing sort
of mildly sexual aggressive beast, who
was always ripping people off.
And somehow he turned from that into our Mickey,
who delights people.
And what Gould showed was-- in this paper,
he actually showed the evolution of Mickey Mouse's muzzle
as over the decades, showing how it was getting smaller,
and the ratio of the forehead to this.
And somewhere along the way, Mickey lost one of his fingers.
And somewhere along the way, his voice
got real prepubescent, which it wasn't early on.
And suddenly, the oh so chased mysterious Minnie shows up,
and all they ever do is sing and dance.
And this is an amazing paper on how the Disney artists
eventually learned what is it about baby animals that
makes everybody want to be around them.
So we see here the releasing stimuli.
Next thing, after the break, what's going on in the head
in between the releasing stimulus,
and out comes the fixed action pattern.
OK.
So five minutes.
Two great questions.
The first one, going back to Niko Tinbergen's attempts
to get baby gulls eaten-- that whole business
about flipping the eggshells over.
Somebody asking, so why haven't eggs and birds
and stuff evolved so that the inside of the egg shell
is speckled also?
And the answer is, I haven't a clue.
Does anybody know why?
Is there some good reason why the inside of egg shells
have to be white?
Calcium or-- well, there's got to be some good reason.
But you go out and test that.
OK.
So that would have been an interesting study.
I have no idea why.
The other one, of the same sort of bent
of the, how do they figure this out-- how do they figure out
that human males can detect, like the sound of women's
voices when they rise around the time of ovulation?
What you do is you record voices,
and then you manipulate the pitch that it's at.
And this is a very subtle effect,
but people listen to it.
And if they're men and they listen to it, on the average,
they will rate the voices that are a little bit higher as more
appealing.
We will hear plenty about stuff like that down the line.
OK.
So what do we got so far?
We have looked at interviewing an animal in its own language
and asking what the behavior is about-- the effect
of experience on the behavior.
Looking at what's going on in terms of adaptive value
in a totally different way than the evolutionary folks
would be looking at.
Looking at what-- in the outside world, what releasing stimulus
triggered the behavior.
Huge take home message there being animals, including us,
are communicating information in sensory realms
we could never even guess at-- interviewing
in its own language.
And also, along the way there, training
ethologists to come up with really clever, cool, elegant
experiments.
So the next step.
What's going on here between when
the releasing stimulus happens, and out pops the behavior
from the other side?
Old ethology jargon-- what is the innate releasing mechanism?
Which is like this really unfortunate phrase.
But what's going on inside?
And it was right around this point
that all the classical ethologists would say,
we don't know!
It's obviously important, but we're not
able to understand it.
And that has changed now.
And what that field is called is neuroethology.
And that is the hottest part of the field
in the last few decades, trying to understand what's
going on in the brain that turns certain releasing stimuli
into behaviors out the other end.
And there have been some amazing successes
in this realm in terms of working out
the nuts and bolts of it.
One example, the one that's probably
the most studied, which is understanding
the neurobiology of birdsong.
Bird song-- how does a bird learn its species
specific song?
How does a bird learn one that winds up
being distinctive for itself?
What happens to birds that have to come up
with a new song every year, because they're
seasonal breeders in a way where they're migrating around?
How do they learn that?
What sort of sensory stimulation do they need from around them?
If you raise a bird in complete isolation,
does it come up with a song which is
exactly what its species does?
No, but it's kind of close to it.
It needs experience to shape it.
What's going on in bird species like [INAUDIBLE] birds
that imitate the sounds of other birds?
And people have been dissecting this down
to the individual neurons for years, understanding
what's going on in between.
Another domain that seems far more inexplicable for why
people would want to spend decades on it
is-- for people who took Bio core,
I always go over this one-- a reflex.
A reflex you find in female hamsters.
Which is you get a female hamster,
and you put pressure, tactile pressure, on her rear end.
And what she will do is arch her back
at that point and produce what is called a lordosis reflex.
So what's that about?
It's obviously a fixed action pattern.
Let's ask an adaptive question.
What's the advantage of having a lordosis reflex?
What it does is, by arching up that way,
it exposes the female's genitals,
making it easier for a male to mount her.
Well, when is that useful for the female?
If she's ovulating.
You only get this reflex when estrogen levels are elevated.
And adaptive value of that built around the fact
that most things that are pressing
on the rear end of female hamsters
are not grad students trying to get their degree eventually.
[INAUDIBLE] ethologically relevant context,
that's part of the mating courtship display stuff.
And there is a guy I know who is the king-- the king of pressing
on the rear end of female hamsters.
People will not be able to talk about the behavior
for centuries to come without his name being
sung about there.
And he and his lab have gotten it
down to individual neurons in the whole reflex pathway,
and which neurons are affected by estrogen,
and how exactly it works-- neuroethology.
Another realm of it, of neuroethology,
is one done with humans these days--
taking advantage of brain scanning techniques, and seeing
what sort of subliminal sensory information you give someone,
and what parts of the brain change
their levels of activity.
And the scared sweat versus the neutral sweat study
is a perfect example of that, and we
will hear plenty of those in the lectures to come.
As neuroethology really took off,
an additional elaboration happened,
which is people began to try doing neuroethology out
in the field with animals in their real habitat.
Because all the ones I just described
were the laboratory animals trying
to do it out in the field, and there's
been a number of approaches.
One is, people-- a guy named John Wingfield used
to be at the University of Washington.
John Wingfield studies birds.
And I have no idea if he ever actually wanted to study birds
or if he was fated to do this from the start.
But what he does is, he studies the physiology and the behavior
of bird species that migrate from Baja
up to the Arctic each year and back again.
Bird species where what happens with their migratory behavior,
if there's an extra freeze that's unexpected,
if spring comes earlier, what are the-- and he
traps these birds.
He nets them, and he's got like electrodes in their heads,
and lets them go to fly off to Alaska, recording from there.
And this is neuroethology stuff-- figuring out
the circuitry going on precisely with that, with birds
in their natural setting.
Another example, which is some of the work I've
done over the years, which is studying baboons out
in their natural habitat and trying to do ethology,
neuroethology stuff, out there.
What, for example, does your personality--
if you were a baboon-- have to do with the brain
chemistry of anxiety in you?
You remember the stuff by now, benzodiazepines
and the benzodiazepine receptors.
Are there personality related differences
in the brain chemistry of benzodiazepines in baboons
out there.
And you can squeeze out a surprising amount
of information.
All of this is part of the transition
back when of saying, well, something
has to be going on in between there.
You're a behaviorist, and you say, who cares?
You're an ethologist, and you would say,
wouldn't it be great that someday we're
going to be able to study it?
And what the neuroethologist actually can do
is study it and begin to work out
circuitry maps and all of that, what's going on inside.
Interviewing the brain of an animal in its own language.
Because-- as you will see in some of the anatomy,
neuroanatomy lectures to come-- you're not
going to make any sense about which parts of the brain
are big, and send projections to which
other parts, until you know something
about the behavior of that species
and what sort of sensory systems it pays attention to.
OK.
So these are sort of the big pieces
of the ethological approach.
What's the behavior?
What triggered it?
What are the intervening neuro endo steps in there?
What's the adaptive value?
What was also the final piece of the ethological approach was,
what does learning have to do with all of this?
We already know that learning is relevant in terms
of those fixed action patterns.
But exploring learning in all sorts of additional ways.
And the ethological contribution to that field
is basically twofold.
The first would be boring, classical,
sort of behaviorist type learning
paradigms that behaviorists had explained centuries before.
What was interesting, showing it in domains of animal behavior,
where everybody else would have said,
they have to learn how to do that?
That's not an instinct?
Showing realms of traditional learning
that were very unexpected.
The second piece was showing types
of learning that break every rule about how learning
works if you're a behaviorist.
OK.
So what would be a standard example of normal learning?
You get reinforced, you're more likely to do something.
You get punished, you're less likely.
The whole song and dance there.
Where does just plain old normal learning-- learning
from trial and error-- come in in places
that one would not expect?
If you are a female monkey, it is not instinctual
for you to know what you're doing with your first baby.
Maternal competence is not a strong instinct.
It does not produce a bunch of fixed action
patterns in, for example, female rhesus monkeys.
They have to learn how to do it.
They have to learn how to hold on to the kid
when they're jumping up in a tree.
They have to learn which end you try to stick on to the nipple.
You have to learn all sorts of stuff like that.
Weird.
All of my kids starved to death, but then today I
tried switching this one around this way.
Isn't that cool?
Anybody know Niko Tinbergen's email address?
What you wind up seeing there is they
have to learn how to do it.
So what sort of evidence would you see?
For example, you have mothers having a higher likelihood
of their kids surviving as you go from their first offspring
to later ones.
OK.
But maybe you can come up with all sorts
of other things going on there.
What else do researchers find?
If you have a big sister, and you are a female rhesus
monkey-- or a female baboon, it's been shown as well.
If you have a big sister who has a baby, when
you have your first baby, your child
is more likely to survive.
How come?
Because you watched her.
You watched your big sister doing it.
Or if your mother had another sister, another daughter,
and you got to-- no, another child of either sex--
and you got to watch, what was even more
clear in the literature was the more experience you had
actually holding on to your niece or nephew there,
the more-- as termed in the field
now-- the more [INAUDIBLE] behavior that you had,
the more likely your first child was to survive.
Because you were learning how to be a competent mother
as a primate, as a monkey.
It's not, oh, instinctual.
They just know how to do it.
It's all hardwired somehow.
This is a realm where you have to learn.
Another domain where this happens,
and another one where what you would immediately say is,
wait, they didn't do this just by reflex or instinctually?
Meerkats-- meerkats who eat all sorts of unlikely things.
And one of the things they eat are scorpions.
And mom meerkats have to teach the kids how to hunt
and eat scorpions without getting yourself in trouble
there.
What is shown-- like teaching techniques,
they would be teaching three blocks away in the Ed school,
in terms of progressively making the task harder
in small increments.
What happens?
The meerkat mom goes and kills a scorpion.
And for the first couple of days,
the baby learns how to eat a scorpion that's already dead.
Then, once the kid has that under control,
the mom goes and captures a scorpion.
Which remains alive, but mom is able to bite off the stinger,
and now leaves the kid with this live scorpion
that it can learn how to hunt, and learn how to kill,
and get food.
And only when they're doing that,
then mom captures a live scorpion with the stinger
still on and plops it down for the kid.
This is exactly what they teach you to do
if you're being a good teacher.
Which is a nice, small, incremental steps.
You don't want to do the same thing for too long.
The kid gets bored.
You don't want to have too big of steps.
They get learned helpless.
And you just-- they're teaching their kids how to hunt,
because the kids don't know how to do it.
Perfectly clear example of classical learning,
but in a domain where nobody thought it would be going on.
Another example of it-- and this is
one where the behavior itself was so unlikely that nobody
would ever have been saying, oh, animals just know instinctually
how to do this, because nobody believed
this behavior could occur-- which is animals making tools.
This has been shown in a number of species, including,
for example, cetaceans.
Where it's been best studied is in apes.
Other ape species.
Actually, we make tools, too.
So all of the ape species.
And Jane Goodall, pioneer of chimp research,
was the first one to discover this-- chimps being
able to strip the little bark and stuff off of a long twig
and insert it into a termite mound
and pull it up with all the termites
that grabbed onto the stick when it was down there.
And now being able to eat the termites.
And chimps, various types of populations of chimps, they
use tools to hammer, to break open nuts.
They know how to use a hammer and anvil.
They get a flat rock, and they do this with this.
All sorts of tool making and tool using.
As we will hear, there is at least one population
of chimps that has been studied where males will actually
fashion large pieces of wood-- Where they will work to modify
it, to use it as a weapon.
They can build tools that are weapons.
So what's going on with that?
And all sorts of studies showing, for example, the more
experience you have sitting and watching somebody else
make these things, the faster you're going to master it.
But you actually want hands on practice.
The more the individual, the other chimp,
gives you the building blocks of it
to start doing the piece and all of that,
and you begin to master it learning by experience.
One thing that is very amusing is
that it has been shown that chimps, the daughters
learn much, much faster than the sons.
Because the sons don't pay attention to mom
when she's sitting there and trying to get them
with their hands to do this.
The daughters are much more attentive.
What you also see is, the larger the social group, the earlier
in life the kids learn the tool use.
And this is brilliant ape behavior,
brilliant ape learning.
Monkeys don't do this.
I have seen baboons-- films of them, actually.
I have seen baboons on films where they are watching
these chimps doing the thing with the stick
there, and going down, and out come the termites.
And do it again and again.
And finally, the chimp is just gorged with all the termites
and staggers off for a nap.
And the baboon comes over and will pick up the stick
and shake it at the termite mound
or push it against the side of it.
Monkeys can't do this.
Apes can, but they don't do it instinctually.
They gotta learn how to do this.
So another domain of learning-- learning purely of the,
we know how this works, we just didn't
think it would be going on in this realm.
But then, what ethology has been most
amazing at is showing types of learning that are simply
unexpected, that break all the classic rules of reinforcement
theory.
One example.
One example of it is what is now called one trial learning.
Which is another term that I think
I used the other day, the one that's
sort of more-- sort of a classic that everybody learned back
when, that animals will imprint on something after one
round of exposure to it.
And the classic example would be Konrad Lorenz
and his famous little duckies.
That when birds come out, there is a short period after which
where they imprint on any big thing moving around,
on a fairly safe assumption that, in most cases,
that big thing is going to be mom.
That's how they bond to mom.
There is a short window, what is now
known as a critical period, where the bonding goes on
during that time.
And whatever big thing is moving around-- and eventually,
people were doing classic ethology studies
with subtraction and substitution of stimuli
and running around with like a stuffed Big Bird.
And they imprint on that, and all sorts
of large mobile objects-- basically anything that moves.
And that's where you would get all the little duckies, goose
stepping behind Konrad Lorenz when they had imprinted on him.
And this is not by trial and error.
Oh, I initially got bonded to this thing
with sharp teeth and claws.
And that was kind of a bummer.
That involved all sorts of blood loss.
So I've learned, don't bond to that sort of thing.
Well, then I tried bonding to, are you my mother bulldozers?
And then I tried bonding to this.
And, oh, eventually you figure out your mother
is the one you should be hanging out.
No.
This is not a domain where you can learn by trial and error.
And what is seen instead is this phenomenon
of one trial learning.
The first thing baby birds are exposed
to in many species, the first big thing moving around,
statistically likely to be mom, that's who you get attached to.
And lots of interesting neuroethology
has gone on over the years trying
to figure out what are the mechanisms of imprinting.
One of the things that come out is
it's nowhere near as dramatic of critical periods--
if you don't figure out who mom is in the next 7 and 1/2
minutes, you are up the creek.
You will never-- it's more a sort of relative term.
But nonetheless, that's not how learning works.
You're supposed to learn from trial and error that
snakes, and leopards, and all of those guys
are not good mothering models.
But it happens.
Another realm.
Something that came to be known as prepared learning.
Which is, there's all sorts of ways
in which some piece of information can be learned.
Or there's all sorts of sensory associations
you could make with something, but you
are prepared to make certain of those associations
more easily than others.
What do I mean by this?
A classic example of it is what's
called the sauce Bearnaise syndrome.
And sauce Bearnaise is some fancy French food
that seems very unappealing.
And I don't know what it's made of.
But this was first described by a guy, University
of Pennsylvania, Martin Seligman, one
of the most sort of major figures
in psychology in the last decades or so.
We will hear plenty about him to come.
And this was, one evening he went out for dinner,
where he had sauce Bearnaise.
And then he went to a concert of some opera or something,
and then he went home.
And for some reason or other, he got himself a terrible stomach
ache.
Terrible stomach ache.
It was a total drag.
All night long, he had it.
He didn't throw up.
It wasn't that bad.
But he had a terrible stomach ache, recovered from it.
Weeks, months later, he goes out for dinner.
And he goes off to this French restaurant,
and has sauce Bearnaise, and is about to take
the first spoonful, or forkful, or handful, or whatever.
And he realizes this smells totally repulsive to him.
He could not eat the sauce Bearnaise.
He has never been able to since then,
because he's associating it with the stomach pains afterward.
Remember, he didn't throw up.
He wasn't burping up sauce Bearnaise vapors or anything.
So it's not like, oh, the taste was just
like the acidic stuff that came roaring up the other direction,
just associating with the stomach pain.
OK.
That's sensible.
I mean, that's not great, but you can kind of
see how that happens.
But you think about it, and that's
breaking all sorts of classical rules of behaviorism
and classical learning.
Which is, if you were going to make an association-- you can
have a choice between an association of a with b or a
with c-- you're going to make the association more
readily with whichever one comes closer in time to a.
So what came closer in time for him?
The opera.
He finished dinner, and then he went to the opera
and spent hours listening to Wagner or something,
and he didn't attribute his stomach ache to that.
The next time he went to an opera, he was perfect.
He was just fine with that.
He had prepared learning.
For pain coming from your gut, you
are far more likely to associate with food than with music.
Prepared learning in us for pain in our GI tract
with gustatory stimuli.
More examples are prepared learning.
So now you take these, and you're
trying to teach them where there's a food source.
Experimental stuff.
And you give them some like mark or sign
or whatever to tell them, here it is, and remember
this for the next time.
Do they make an association between the food source
and whatever marker you put up?
And what they show in the studies is,
they can modify the marker.
They either modify the shape of it-- here's
a little triangle, square, or whatever-- the color of it,
or they can modify the smell.
The smell that they-- some smell source that they--
And what they show is, bees have prepared learning.
They learn the smell associations much, much faster
than the shape or the color associations.
They can learn of the other ones,
but bees have prepared learning for making associations
by olfactory cues more readily than making them
by color or shape.
More examples.
One of the great urban legends is
that humans are innately scared of spiders and snakes.
Humans are not, because there's all sorts of cultures
where people love spiders and where, in fact, they
love spiders.
Because they love to chase after them,
and pull their legs out, and then cook them up and eat them,
and people are not scared in front of spiders
and getting the willies from them.
It is not innate.
But humans show prepared learning for being
scared of spiders and snakes.
Which is, you can show in humans and in monkeys, as well,
the conditioning that's needed to associate, for example,
a picture of a spider with the autonomic response
to a mild shock, versus a picture of Disneyland
and Mickey and associate it.
That it takes less of an association for we
primates to associate something like a spider or a snake
picture with something unpleasant than all sorts
of other animate stimuli.
More examples of how this works.
You give people-- or, as it turns out,
you give monkeys-- a task.
You flash up a complex picture, and you take it away
for a few seconds or whatever.
And then you flash it up again, and one thing
has changed in the picture.
It's a street scene, wherever it is.
And you need to pick out which it is.
And with the monkey studies, you need
to indicate sort of where it was to get the reward.
Are you able to pick up the subtle thing that changed?
Humans and monkeys are better picking up
for animate objects that change, are
better at spotting if there are things like snakes,
than if they are animals that we don't associate like that.
We are better, in this very rapid exposure, almost
subliminal stimuli, we have prepared learning for that.
Do the exact sort of thing with humans,
where what changes from one flash to the other
is either an animate object or an inanimate object.
Humans have prepared learning to pick up
stimuli of animate objects much, much more readily.
A shorter exposure time, more of a subliminal cue, all of that.
So prepared learning is being all of these examples where,
by any logic, universal rules.
You learn to associate this with this, as BF Skinner,
or just as easily with this, or just as easily with this.
And dog, and cat, and they're interchangeable,
and sensory stimuli.
But no, all sorts of species come already
wired up to learn certain associations more readily
than others.
So completely violating behaviorism.
OK.
Final domain where ethologists think about interesting stuff
is one of those ones that used to be just the backwaters,
or one of those were people would say,
there's no way this could ever be studied.
And people finally got some headway
in figuring how to look at this stuff, which is finally
all sorts of interesting things--
not just studying the ethology releasing stimuli, neurobiology
adaptive advantage of behaviors, but understanding
what the internal cognitive and emotional life is of an animal.
And you can see, it's right at this point
that old classical behaviorists would just
have to leave the room they were so repulsed by this.
Because this was just like William James
navel contemplation.
What do you mean what's going on inside the head of the animal?
You measure what it's doing.
It produces a behavior, and that's how you study it.
And what instead has come out is another new branch
of ethology known as cognitive ethology.
What's going on there?
One of these sort of landmark ones of it--
of sort of a piece of it-- came from a guy
named Donald Griffin, who passed away a few years ago.
He was in his 90s.
He was one of the towering figures of animal behavior,
whatever, over the centuries.
What Donald Griffin discovered was echolocation--
that bats echolocate.
Classic, classic ethologist flavored thing of, whoa!
How about we interview the bat in sound frequencies
that we humans don't consider to be sensory stimuli?
And opening up this whole new world.
He was central, played a key role
in World War II in the development of sonar,
working off of some of the same principles.
But he's the person who discovered echolocation.
Just to make all of you who are seniors feel really upset,
this was his senior honors thesis at Harvard.
And, oh!
Discovered echolocation.
So he passed.
And he spent his entire career on this
and doing amazingly elegant stuff.
And people came to kiss his feet.
He was such an amazing experimentalist.
And when he was about 70 years old,
clearly what occurred to him was,
I don't really care what anybody else thinks at this point.
I've got something that I want to bring up,
which is the possibility that animals actually
have awareness.
And he published a book called On the Question
of Animal Awareness.
And it's clear he published it then because he had tenure.
And he already had tenure in his nursing home,
and he wasn't going to get booted out by everyone saying,
oh my god, did you see what happened to Donald Griffin?
He used to be a real scientist.
What happened to the guy?
Here he is, sitting around speculating on,
do animals have internal lives of awareness?
And what he did was outline how what a research program to get
at that would be like.
And people have been studying it ever
since and showing that animals have strategic awareness.
They are doing all sorts of subtle really.
Really interesting field.
So starting it off with that.
Closely related to that was the issue
of whether animals have self-awareness.
And we know that dogs don't, because they
will bark at themselves in the mirror for the rest of time.
But do animals have self-awareness?
This was something pioneered by a guy named Gordon Gallup.
And like one of those brilliant, elegant studies.
Here's what he did.
He would take a chimp, a captive chimp,
and he would give it a mild anesthetic,
so the chip would be a little bit drowsy for a minute or two.
And while it was down, he would quickly
run in with a magic marker and put
a little circle like on the forehead of the chimp.
Chimp comes to, goes back to its business,
where there is now a mirror in the room.
And at some point, the chimp comes up to it,
because they'll wander around and encounter this.
And here's the critical question right now.
Can the chimp figure out that's not another chimp, that's me?
And what the evidence was that he produced
to suggest this was precisely the case was showing
the chimps were now far more likely than at the chance
level-- you see how it's being set up,
this is a well-designed experiment-- far
more likely to look in the mirror
and scratch here to see what is this thing?
Where did this thing come from?
And that has been viewed as the gold standard
for self-awareness.
Do you look at that and respond as if you
were knowing that that is you rather than,
that's some other animal?
And self-awareness by this test has been
shown in all sorts of species.
Elephants by this rule have self-awareness.
I don't know who puts the magic marker thing up
on their forehead.
But when you do that, they will bring the trunk up
and investigate it.
But interestingly, marmoset monkeys--
those delightful, pair bonding for life South American
monkeys-- marmoset monkeys don't have self-awareness.
And that's kind of puzzling, because all sorts
of other primates that in the rough way
are as neurobiologically complex had it.
And they don't.
And, OK, so Marmoset monkeys don't.
But then an ethologist, a guy named Marc Hauser at Harvard,
thought in the monkey's own language.
And knowing marmosets-- he was a marmoset researcher-- in order
to spot this on your forehead, if you were a monkey,
you have to be looking in the mirror something
very close to looking in your reflection's eyes.
And marmosets don't do that as part of their social system.
They never noticed there was this up there,
because they never look up at that part of their reflection.
So what he would do is, he would now do the same paradigm
and put the little dot here.
And marmosets, off they are a minute later
trying to figure out what this thing was about.
Interviewing the animal in its own language.
What else?
Another domain of this.
So awareness, self awareness.
Another thing now shown in other species called theory of mind.
One that psychologists, developmental psychologists
love.
Theory of mind.
At what point when you were growing up
do you suddenly realize, number one,
there are other individuals?
There are boundaries to individuals.
You are not one sort of ego boundaryless
sort of continuation of mom.
There's other individuals who could
have different information about the world than you do.
And that usually comes around age 4 or 5 or so.
My children got theory of mind when they were 3 and 1/2.
And we can document that if need be,
but it comes out somewhere around then.
And what you see-- it's a classic test that it's done.
You tell the child a story, OK, here's the-- some of you
will know this.
The Mary Ann, the Barbie Ann?
The Sally Anne.
OK.
The Sally Anne test of theory of mind.
So you tell this kid this story about,
here's this kid who has their doll named Sally Anne.
Sally?
OK, Sally.
OK.
So they have this doll named Sally Anne.
And you tell them-- they're totally attached to Sally Anne.
They go to sleep with it, and always
on the bed, and all of that.
And the kid goes off every day to preschool or whatever.
And this is the day that mom looks at Sally Anne there
and says, oh no, Sally Anne is all soiled,
and it's time to throw Sally Anne in the washing machine.
So in goes Sally Anne.
And Sally Anne is then on the dryer,
eventually sitting on top of the dryer,
when child comes back from school.
And now you say to the kid you're testing, oh,
where's that child going to go and look for Sally Anne?
If you have theory of mind, you will
know the kid doesn't know that Sally Anne wound up
in the washing machine, because she was off at preschool.
And you would then say, oh, still in the bedroom.
On the other hand, if you don't have theory of mind,
it's inconceivable to you that the child in the story
wouldn't know, because you know.
And they must know the same thing, because we all
know the same thing.
And you would say, the child will go look
on the washing machine.
That's how you begin to see the evidence of beginning
to understand that another individual has
different information than you have.
And people were soon showing this with chimps.
Here would be one example.
That's not a smile.
That's a banana.
So you would have one chimp here and one chimp here.
And here's how you would do this paradigm, which is this
would be a high ranking chimp.
This would be a low ranking one.
Put him in there, and they're watching.
And an experimenter comes along and puts down
a really cool piece of food and in a way
that the chimps can't necessarily see.
But the main thing here is that there
are these dividers in between.
In one case the divider, near the dominant individual,
is glass.
They can see through it.
In the other case, it's opaque.
They can't see through it.
So now, you release the chimps to go for the food.
And what happens is the low ranking guy--
if and only if this was glass here--
doesn't bother trying to get the banana.
Because he knows the other guy saw the banana.
Put up an opaque one, and now he will go for it.
Design is all wrong here.
There's no divider here.
So release this guy.
And if this was opaque, he will now
go for it, because he knows the other guy doesn't
know there's a banana there.
He knows that the other guy has different information
than he does.
Parts of the controls you would expect to see now
have this with the glass here, where the dominant individual
sees somebody bring in the banana, shows it to them,
put it down behind the opaque screen.
And take out this dominant guy, and put
in a different dominant guy, let them loose,
and he will go for the banana.
Because he knows, oh, it's not simply the rule
that dominant guys who scare me know there's a banana there.
They know, he's the one who saw there's the banana.
This guy doesn't know there's a banana there.
Theory of mind.
Or now do it with a lower ranking individual,
and it doesn't matter to you whether or not
they could look through the glass or not.
You're going to go for the banana,
because you're going to get it regardless.
The first bits of evidence of theory
of mind that a chimp understands that other chimps have
different information than them.
What the studies since then have shown
is that chimps do not know how to do theory of mind
in a cooperative setting.
They can only do it for competition.
They can only do it when they are
highly motivated in that way.
But still, this is an ape.
This is really quite impressive.
Birds can do theory of mind.
Apparently, the smartest birds in the entire universe
are corvids, which are ravens and crows who are wildly smart.
And all sorts of interesting ethology studies
that have been done on them, including doing theory of mind.
You show, with these guys, you give them nuts
or whatever it is, seeds or whatever, which
they will hide in places.
And if there is another one around looking at them,
they won't hide it.
Or they'll put it there.
They'll dig it down into the sawdust there or whatever.
And when the other guy isn't looking,
they'll quick get it and move it to someplace else.
Because they will know, when it's over here,
that this guy doesn't have the information.
They can do theory of mind when stashing food.
More things that animals can do that fall
within the realm of this cognitive ethology stuff, which
is animals can distinguish between
intentional and unintentional behaviors.
How has this been done in studies?
One example, you take a chimp, a captive chimp.
And it has some totally great food item sitting out there
that it's about to get access to.
And along comes some lummox of a human walking through.
And in one case, the human leans down
and takes the plate of food and flings it someplace else.
And in the other circumstance, the human
comes along and accidentally trips over the plate,
flinging it someplace else.
When the human leans down and flung it away,
the chimp will bang on the walls a lot longer
than when the person accidentally tripped over it.
Chimps can distinguish between intentional and unintentional
gestures like that.
And dogs know the difference.
Dogs absolutely know the difference
between somebody who has kicked them
and somebody who has tripped over them.
All sorts of stuff like that, as well.
What else?
Evidence of animals being able to plan for the future.
And one great example of this has
been with those corvid birds.
And here you have a design where every day,
there's two compartments that the bird can go into.
And on one day, you put food here.
And the next day there, and the next day there.
You alternate back and forth.
The key thing is, any time you put food in here,
you put a huge amount in here.
And at the end of the day, you clear it out.
Whereas when you're putting in food here,
you're putting in only a tiny amount.
So on alternating days, they get a lot here.
The next day, a little bit.
A lot here, a little.
And what you show, what you see after not that long of a time,
is these guys, on the day that there's food here,
will take some of it and stash it there for the next day.
Ravens and crows will do this.
This is planning for the future.
They have flexible, cognitive strategies.
Here's what's been shown in bees.
OK.
So you do your basic Hugo Von Frisch deal.
Which is you show a bee some interesting food source.
They go back to the hive, and they dance and tell everybody
about it.
But this time, what you do is you
give the bee completely ridiculous, implausible
information.
You take the bee out to the middle
of the lake in your rowboat, and you give him the food there,
the nectar.
And they go flying back to the hive, and they dance like mad,
and everything we know about ethology
predicts what the bees are supposed to do at this point.
But the bees don't do that.
Because, in effect, they're sitting there saying, yeah,
right.
In the middle of the lake?
You know what you're telling us?
You're telling us there's food over in the middle of the lake
there.
That doesn't make any sense.
We're not going to listen to you.
They don't respond if a bee, thanks to an experimental
manipulation, is telling about a food source in a place that
cannot possibly be.
Flexible cognitive strategies.
Finally, some evidence in various species,
but predominately studied in chimps, of numerosity.
Numerosity, as in having a sense of numbers
having meaning in and of themselves.
This is totally cool, this experiment.
OK.
What you do is you teach a chimp a series of three objects.
And you show him the first three,
and they need to recognize that, if I've
seen this one before, I press a lever, I get a food reward.
You train them at the same time to recognize
three other pictures-- another trio,
another trio, another trio.
So the chimp has now learned a dozen different trios
of pictures and knows how to do that.
If I have seen this trio before, hit the lever,
and I get a food reward.
Now what you do is you make a mistake.
What you do is you take-- here, instead of HIJ,
you take out the J, and you substitute it with A.
In this case, what you do is you take out the I,
and you substitute it with B. What's the difference?
In this first case, what you're doing is
you're removing the third object in the sequence
and replacing it with something from the first object
in a different sequence.
In this case, you're replacing a second object
in the sequence with another second object in the sequence.
And when you do this quickly, tasks quickly,
chimps make more mistakes with this than with this.
What's going on in their heads?
They're saying, oh yeah, this one looks right.
No, wait, that one's not right.
It's a different number two than the one for this trio.
When it matches the number in the sequence,
they make more mistakes, because they have partially
filed it away.
Not only have I seen this picture before-- not only
have I seen this picture before as part of this trio,
but when I see it as the trio, it's the third one that I see.
It's the first one they have had some sort
of numerosity information coming in there.
Another study showing this, and this one with chimps.
And in this one, what you do is a strategy
you've heard already, which is you record
the vocalizations of chimps.
And what you do is you record the sounds of big male chimps
giving threatening bellows.
So now, you hide the speaker in some bush there,
and you've got your chimps nearby.
And you play the sound of some big male bellowing,
and it's a chimp they've never heard before.
Chimps recognize individual voices, no big surprise.
And what happens is all the males run over
to the bush to investigate.
Now make it a little scarier.
Play the sound of two strange male chimps
bellowing, giving their territorial calls.
And do you run over or not?
You have a whole bunch of males run over.
Now make it even scarier.
Three voices of them.
And what you see is, by the time it gets up to there, if there
are more voices of novel males that they're hearing,
than the number of males in their group,
they get out of there.
And what you'll see is, they're playing the voice there.
They begin, and they add in another one sequentially.
And say this will come up to four voices,
and they'll show the three chimps are like coming
up there ready to investigate.
And three voices, and uh-oh, we're out numbered.
Numbered.
We're out numbered.
And they slither back and go the other way at that point.
They have a sense of the number four is
bigger than the number three.
Finally, evidence of transitive thinking.
Not just in nonhuman primates, but as
shown here by Russ Fernals in the bio department in fish.
I'm watching a defeat b.
Then b defeats me.
I go and give a subordinate gesture to a.
And this has now been shown.
And a similar theme again, it's only
done in the context of competition,
highly motivated circumstances.
OK.
So what do we got now?
We've got a completely different way of thinking about behavior
and emphasizing here natural setting-- experimentation
rather than coming up with those just so stories.
The notions of all sorts of species,
including us, functioning in sensory domains that
are unheard of.
And finally, all sorts of types of learning that
are ways in which organisms are not supposed
to learn that all of us do.
 You probably got some cues from the beard and other things.
My name is Nathan.
I'm a graduate student.
I'm a fourth year PhD student in the neuroscience program.
And I'm going to be giving you the introductory lecture today
on, basically how the brain works.
And just to get a sense of who is here before I get
started, how many of you are either
a biology major or HumBio majors and decided to come today?
That's a lot of people.
OK.
How many in other hard sciences or engineering?
A few.
OK.
How many in the social sciences?
A few.
And humanities?
All right, humanities.
Anybody else in anything other?
OK.
We've got a few others as well.
OK, great.
So for some of you, this is going to be a review.
And hopefully, you'll still learn something new.
For some of you, this is going to be the first time
that you're hearing these terms.
And hopefully, this will give you
just a very general background so
that when you hear Dr. Sapolsky give lectures
on neuroscience later, you have a better understanding of what
he's talking about.
So we started out this whole course talking
about the everlasting question of,
why did the chicken cross the road?
Yes, that's supposed to be a chicken.
My major is not art.
But the chicken is crossing the road.
And we started the course basically
saying that this whole course is going to teach us why
the chicken crossed the road.
And specifically, the first half of this course
is talking about the ways that different sciences
have approached this question.
So we started out with evolution,
which would ask, how did this behavior of crossing the road
evolve over many, many, many millions of years?
Why was it adaptive?
Why did chickens who crossed the road produce more offspring?
All of that.
It was studied by old men going around
in boats to the Galapagos to see how
chickens on different islands crossed the road
and then figured out how that happened
over millions of years.
The next week, we went into molecular genetics.
And there we talked about the actual genes
that control this evolution and how it happened.
And there we were talking about people thinking
about how genes change in the genome over time,
how they hop around, if we're thinking about women in corn
fields looking at this, and how those individual genes led
to evolution.
Then the next week, we went into behavior genetics.
And this, specifically was asking
about what individual genes are accounting
for the variation in the ways the chicken crossed the road.
So some chickens cross the road really fast.
Some of them do it slowly.
Some of them don't do it at all.
How does the variation in the way
that the genomes are structured for these different chickens
account for that?
So that was behavior genetics.
And then on Monday, you heard about ethology,
which really talked about studying
this behavior in nature.
And we talked about the fixed action pattern.
And we talked about all the old man
in field booths going out into nature to observe that fixed
action pattern and talked about the stimulus the chicken would
receive, why it would cross the road after that,
how it does it, again, looking at that out in nature.
And that was ethology.
So today, we're going to talk about yet another bucket, yet
another way to think about this, which is neuroscience.
And neuroscience is going to focus, specifically
on this black box that we talked about on Monday
where you get the input coming in of some stimulus that makes
the chicken cross the road.
And neuroscience is about that black box in the middle
and why it is that the chicken is doing this.
What was going on in the chicken's brain
a few milliseconds before it crossed the road?
Why is it that the specific cells in the brain
are doing this?
And how are they doing it?
So that's the overall background of why we're
thinking about neuroscience.
And the goal for today is really to give you
an overview of the brain and the nervous system,
get to know some different parts of it
not so that you memorize a list of different parts of the brain
but so that you get a general overview
that different parts of the brain
are specialized for different behaviors.
And also, we're going to zoom in a little bit
on the actual cells in the brain, how they communicate.
Again, not so that you can sit there memorizing lists
of different things but that so when
it comes up in future lectures, you
will have a better understanding of what we're talking about.
And just as a caveat before we start, I, as a neuroscientist,
think this is the coolest discipline out there, better
than all the others.
And you'll see I put in a quote from Thomas Edison that
says, "The chief function of the body
is to carry the brain around," which
is a very brain-centric way of thinking about the world.
And there are a lot of people who look at neuroscience
and think of it that way.
Yes, neuroscience has its limitations.
Want to put that out there from the beginning.
It can be very brain-centric.
It can be thinking about how different parts of the brain
control different behaviors without considering the bigger
evolutionary aspects or any of the other aspects.
So it does have its limitations.
But I think it's really cool.
So that's why I'm going to tell you about it today.
So let's start out.
You have a brain.
Actually, this is my brain.
I volunteered for a psych study back in college
and got to look at some pictures in a scanner.
And they gave me this printout of my brain afterwards.
And the brain, I think, is an absolutely amazing,
amazing thing.
And one thing that people love about the brain
is that it starts working and keeps working.
But just as a reminder from this quote,
"It never stops working until you stand up in front of public
to speak."
So during this lecture, there may
be things that are confusing.
If you don't understand them because I'm not explaining them
in a way that makes them understandable to you,
I've put my email address up there.
It's also in the handout.
And it was at the beginning of the presentation.
So definitely email me if you have any questions.
Or come to see me after class.
And I'll be giving this first 45 minutes or so
introduction to the brain and the nervous system.
Then, Anthony's going to come up afterwards and tell you
a little bit more about how neurons
communicate with each other.
So let's think about the brain and the nervous system.
And to give you a really broad overview,
the nervous system is divided into two really broad classes,
the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system.
And we'll start with the central nervous system, which
is what most people think about when
they think about neuroscience, which
is the brain and spinal cord.
So you have this brain sitting up there in your head.
You have the spinal cord going down
communicating to and from the brain.
And this is the central nervous system.
And I'm going to go through some different parts
of the central nervous system just
to give you an idea that there are different parts
and that they do different things.
Again, don't worry about memorizing them.
This is really just to get you familiar with what's
going on up there.
So if we look at the brain more carefully
and look at different parts of the brain,
we've got these different parts that people-- neuroscientists
specifically-- have divided up for us.
And if we start at the bottom down there with the brain stem,
the brain stem sits at the bottom of the brain
at the top of the spinal cord.
And it's what ends up relaying the information
to and from the spinal cord and to and from the brain.
So you have your brain up here doing
all the processing, spinal cord down there sending out
all the signals to make you move or to send up
sensory information.
The brain stem sits in the middle
and helps regulate what goes through.
Then, you have the cerebellum sitting at the very back
of the brain up there.
And the cerebellum is a really cool part of the brain.
It's really, really wrinkled.
It has lots of different cells packed into it.
And what it does is it helps control your motor movement
and specifically helps when you have to learn something new.
So when you have to learn how to play piano for the first time
or when you have to play basketball for the first time,
you're going to make mistakes.
And what the cerebellum does is it helps
correct for those mistakes.
So when you are shooting a hoop for the first time
and it goes off to the left, then you have to learn,
OK, I need to move it over to the right a little bit
next time.
The cerebellum is what does that.
And when I teach this to middle schoolers or high schoolers,
one fun thing I do with them is I
bring along these specialized classes,
which have prisms on them.
So when you wear them, it skews your view
of the world a few degrees to one side.
So if I'm looking, say, at this marker
here, when I put on the prisms, it's going
to look like it's over here.
So I do this to the kids.
And the kids look out at the marker,
and I tell them to quickly reach for it.
They see it over here.
So they start out reaching this way thinking
that the marker is over there.
But what happens over time is that they
do this over a few minutes, and eventually they correct for it.
So even though their vision is out here,
they've corrected for it by moving their arm over here
to where the marker is.
And that's learning that happens in the cerebellum.
Then, the really cool thing is they take off the glasses.
And because the cerebellum has taught them
that they need to reach to the left of where
the visual field is, they look out at this marker.
They start reaching over here to try to get it.
So the cerebellum corrects for that.
And again, after a few minutes, they
do that a little bit longer.
And they eventually reach for the marker.
So that's learning that's happening
in the cerebellum, really cool part of the brain.
Then above the brain stem and the cerebellum,
you have this wrinkled outer layer
of the brain called the cortex.
And the cortex we can broadly think
of in four different lobes.
And again, broad theme for this lecture, different lobes,
different parts of the brain are specialized
for different functions.
So you have the frontal lobe up, as you would expect,
at the front of the brain.
And the frontal lobe, among many other things,
plans your actions and controls your movement.
So this is the part of your brain
that's going to be sending a lot of connections
down through the spinal cord to make you move your arms,
move your legs, move the other parts of your body.
And that's all happening because of the neurons
that are up there in the spinal cord-- in the frontal lobe.
And again, broad theme, different parts of the brain
are specialized for different functions.
Different parts of the frontal lobe, different parts
of that part of the cortex that control movement
control different parts of your body.
So you've got a part of that frontal cortex that
controls your foot and your left foot
and your right foot and your left hand and your right hand.
And they're all in specific places in the cortex.
And they line up the way you would expect them to
in the body.
So if your foot cortex is down here,
then your leg and your knee are going
to be up here and then your trunk and then
your arms and then the parts of the cortex that control
facial movements up at the top.
So it's organized according to function.
So that's one thing that happens in the frontal lobe.
Then, you have behind it the parietal lobe.
And right next to the part that controls your movement
in the frontal lobe is the part of the parietal lobe
that senses the sensory touch information
from the outside world.
And again, form follows function.
So different parts of the parietal lobe
are specialized for different parts
of the body, different parts of your touch information.
And not only are there different parts of it
but the sizes of the cortex that receive that information
are also different sizes.
So you've got your finger tips that are really sensitive,
have lots of nerve endings, have lots of sensory information
coming from them.
Your fingertips have a big part of cortex represented
in the parietal lobe.
So again, different parts, different functions,
different sizes.
Below the parietal lobe, you have the temporal lobe,
which is sitting here next to your temples
as you might expect.
And the temporal lobe, among other things,
receives the auditory information.
Your hearing information comes into that part of the cortex.
And also, as you'll hear later, deep inside that lobe
are the parts of the brain that help for memory formation.
So the temporal lobe receives auditory information
and also has a really important part for memory formation.
Then finally, at the back of the brain,
you have the occipital lobe.
And all the way at the back of the brain
here, this occipital lobe is where you're
receiving visual information.
So visual information comes into your eyes,
travels all the way to the back of the brain
to the occipital lobe.
And that's where it gets processed.
So different parts of the brain are doing different things.
And this is just a really broad way of thinking about that.
So I'm next going to go over some specific parts
of the brain that you're going to hear a lot
about in the coming lectures.
For now, it's just an introduction.
But hopefully, when you hear them again later,
you'll be able to say, ah, I remember that.
So the limbic system, you're going
to hear about again and again and again.
It's this series of structures that are underneath the cortex
but sort of above the brain stem.
And in general, the limbic system controls a lot of things
that we associate with emotion, with learning,
memory, really important things that an animal has
to do to behave.
And two structures we're going to hear
a lot about time and time again are the hippocampus
and the amygdala.
So the hippocampus up there in blue
is-- well, the hippocampus word itself means seahorse.
And supposedly, when neuroanatomists
were looking at this, they thought
it looked like a seahorse.
I don't see it, but let me know if you do.
And this part of the brain is really important for memory
and forming new memories.
And the way that scientists first found this out in humans
anyway was by a bit of an accident.
The hippocampus, they found out, is this place
where new memories are made.
But they didn't do it by any sort of experimental approach
that you would suspect them to.
What happened is there was this patient,
one of the most famous patients in all of neuroscience,
named HM.
For privacy reasons, his name up until he died
was known just as HM.
And this patient had really terrible seizures, really bad
epilepsy that could not be controlled
and was debilitated by these seizures.
So when he was a young man, they tried
all sorts of different techniques
to try to control these seizures.
And in the end, what they had to do
was actually figure out where these seizures started
in the brain and surgically remove that part.
And it turned out that part in this patient
included the hippocampus.
So they took out the hippocampus on both sides of the brain.
And after the surgery, Patient HM
didn't have seizures anymore.
Great.
Wonderful.
But what they found out is that this patient afterwards
couldn't form any new memories.
When he had nurses come in to visit him
who visited him every day after the surgery,
every time he met them it was like he was meeting them
for the first time.
He couldn't store that memory.
But the really interesting thing was
when they asked him about events from his childhood,
he could still remember those.
He could remember who the president of the United States
was in his childhood.
So the memories were stored somewhere else in the brain.
But the ability to make the new memories
was dependent on the hippocampus.
So that's how they discovered by accident
that the hippocampus is the part of the brain forming
new memories.
Another part of the brain you're going
to hear about a lot, a lot, a lot is make the amygdala.
And the amygdala are those two yellow almond-shaped things
sitting up in the front of the hippocampus.
And as you've already heard, these
are parts of the brain that are really
involved in fear and anxiety.
So if you remember the example that Dr. Sapolsky gave
on Monday when he was talking about scared
sweat versus exercise sweat and how we can actually
tell whether we're smelling scared sweat or exercise sweat,
one way that they see that difference
is when they look at the brains of people who are smelling
sweat from a scared person, the amygdala lights up.
But when you're smelling sweat that
was given off by somebody who was exercising,
it doesn't light up as much.
So the amygdala's really important for sensing fear.
And it's important for forming anxiety as well.
So when you look at an angry face or a fearful face,
the amygdala will light up.
But when you look at a happy face, it won't.
So that's the amygdala.
You'll hear a lot more about it later,
really important part of the brain for fear and anxiety.
Other parts of the brain you're sure to hear tons and tons
and tons about later on are the hypothalamus and pituitary
gland.
And these are-- you can think of them as hormone central.
These are the parts of the brain that
control how hormones are released
to the rest of the body, control a lot of different behaviors.
So the hypothalamus sits in the center of the brain right
at the very bottom.
And the pituitary is underneath it
and secretes a lot of those hormones
out into the bloodstream.
And it's an old joke but one that gets
repeated over and over again.
You can think of the different types of behaviors
that the hypothalamus controls as four Fs.
You've got fight.
You've got flight.
You've got feeding behavior and reproductive behavior.
So you've got those four Fs of what the hypothalamus controls.
[LAUGHTER]
Yes.
Now, you get it.
Yes.
So you're going to hear tons and tons more about this.
For now, just know that they sit at the bottom of the brain
and help control a lot of these behaviors.
So what else do we have in the nervous system?
We've got all these different parts of the brain.
But we've also got the spinal cord
coming down from the brain.
And just like in the brain itself,
the spinal cord is specialized.
You have parts of the spinal cord that send out information.
And you've got parts of the spinal cord that
receive the information.
So you've got motor nerves.
And you've got sensory nerves in different parts
of the spinal cord.
You've got different parts of the spinal cord, of course,
for your arms and your legs, basically what
you need to know for now about the spinal cord.
You're also going to be hearing a lot more in future lectures
about the peripheral nervous system.
And the peripheral nervous system
has all of the motor nerves and sensory nerves that
are outside of the spinal cord.
So a lot of the things that sense touch information or heat
or anything else out in the periphery
are part of the peripheral nervous system.
And then, you've also got a whole part
of the peripheral nervous system that happens
pretty much automatically.
You don't have to think about it.
So you've got nerves that are controlling your heartbeat,
your digestion, your breathing.
And normally, you don't have to think
about keeping those going.
So those are another part that you'll hear
a lot more from Dana later on.
So that's really a broad overview
of the different parts of the nervous system
and what they do.
So now, we're going to think a little bit more closely
about what's actually inside a brain, what
the individual cells are, what they're doing,
how they make you behave.
And again, this is not a list for you to remember.
It's just to let you know that there are different cell types,
and they have different functions.
And I'm going to tell you first about something that came up
while I was looking online and trying to figure out
what to say for this lecture.
And I realize that it's illegal in seven states
to give an introductory neuroscience lecture
and not mention the name Santiago Ramon y Cajal.
So Santiago Ramon y Cajal, why is he this god figure
in neuroscience?
What did he do?
So when Santiago Roman y Cajal was
doing most of his scientific work at the end of the 1800s,
mostly in the 1890s, the general theory
about the way the brain worked was
that it wasn't individual cells that were
performing their functions.
Instead, the brain was thought of as this web,
this interconnected web of mush, basically,
that did all of its computational work
to make you behave.
People knew that the brain was where behavior started
and where it was controlled.
But they didn't really know what it was
inside the brain that did that.
So the prevailing theory was that you had this web.
And rather than just take that at face value,
Ramon y Cajal decided to experimentally figure out
if that was the case.
So he found this really cool technique invented
by a different guy named Golgi.
And this technique allowed him to take
small slices of the brain and turn about 1%
of the cells in that slice black.
We still don't know how it works.
But he was able to do it.
And then, he drew these really, really detailed pictures
of what that looked like in the microscope.
And these images are just absolutely gorgeous.
There's a whole class of people that when
they see these images, tears of joy stream down their face.
They fall to their knees weeping, praising
the gods of neuroscience.
These are the people who become neuroscience graduate students.
So these cells and these pictures that he drew
showed us that there actually are
individual cells in the brain that are doing this work.
It's not a complete mess.
It's not a complete web.
It's actually individual cells.
And so he drew out these beautiful pictures of neurons
and also all of the other cells that are in the brain.
And I have a good friend who studies
all of these other cells in the brain that are not the neurons,
not the ones that are actually doing the computational work.
And I promised her I'd never give an introductory lecture
without mentioning these.
So first, I'll start out with those cells.
So 90% of the cells in your brain and spinal cord
are not actually neurons.
They're called glia.
And glia basically, by definition
is anything in the brain or spinal cord
that is not a neuron.
And glia, the word, means glue because people
saw these cells in there and thought they were just glue
sticking the neurons together.
But it turns out they actually do a lot more than that.
You've got cells called astrocytes, which
are these star-shaped cells.
And they, in a very general sense,
supply nutrients to the neurons and help
regulate how they fire.
Then, you've also got these cells called oligodendrocytes,
or Schwann cells.
Again, long names you don't need to memorize.
But they wrap around the wires of neurons
and make their firing go faster.
Then, you've got microglia, which
are yet another glial cell that are in the brain.
And they're basically the brain's immune system.
They move around the brain.
They send out little processes out into parts of the brain
to figure out if the brain is getting infected by viruses
or bacteria or if there are any dead cells that
need to be cleared up.
And they do all of that work.
So 90% of your brain is actually all of these other cells doing
this work.
But what they're doing this work for
is so that you can have your neurons working.
And the neurons are what we're going
to focus on for the next 10, 15 minutes or so.
And these are the complicated but wonderful
computational units of the brain.
And in an average human brain, you've
got about 100 billion neurons.
And each of those has about 10,000 connections
to other neurons.
And those connections are called synapses.
So if you think about that, you've
got roughly a quadrillion synapses
in your brain, a quadrillion connections between neurons.
And just to give you some perspective, the number
of stars in the Milky Way, the number
of stars that you can see out there in our own galaxy
is about 300 billion.
So you've got a quadrillion synapses
just sitting there in your brain, which is already
more than 1,000 times more than the number of stars
that are out there in the Milky Way galaxy.
So you've got all of these connections packed
in there in their brain doing all of this computational work.
So how does it actually work?
So here I'm actually going to switch over if I can.
Great.
So here we're going to talk about the neuron itself
and what the different parts of it are,
what the different parts of it do,
and how it works, how it communicates.
So this is a very badly drawn picture of a neuron.
But it will give you an idea of what a neuron is
and how it functions.
So you've got different parts of it.
You've got out here, dendrites.
And these are what receive the information on a neuron.
They get the information from the cell before it
and pass it on down into the cell.
Down here you've got the soma or the cell body of the neuron.
And importantly, you have the nucleus,
just like you do in any other cell that
has all the DNA in it.
And then, there's an important part down here.
So you're getting all of this input from the dendrites
from the cells before giving you information at the dendrites
that goes into the cell.
And somehow the cell has to decide
whether to pass that information on to the next cell or not.
And that happens at this specialized part of the cell
called the axon hillock.
I guess it's like a hill but not quite as big.
So you have the axon hillock there.
And then down here, you have the axon,
which you can think of as the wire that's
sending the information on to the next cell.
And then down here, you have the terminal.
And this is where the cell will send on information
on to the next neuron.
So these are the general parts of a neuron
that you'll need to think about in terms
of how neurons communicate.
And information is generally going
to flow from dendrites down to the cell body,
get summed up at the axon hillock.
The cell will decide whether to fire or not
and send that on down to the terminal.
So that's a basic overview of a neuron
and how those different parts work.
So how does it actually work?
How does it actually send that signal?
And this is just going to give you a really broad overview
of how a neuron does this.
So if you think about a neuron sitting there
in the middle of the brain, there's
lots of electrical activity, lots of things going on.
Somehow a neuron if it sends a signal
has to get heard above all that noise.
So the way a neuron solves this problem is it
is either on or completely off, completely quiet.
It's not a system where you have a continuum,
where you have-- where the cell is kind of on,
a little bit more on, a little bit more
on, and then totally on.
It's not that way.
Because that wouldn't really get heard above all of the noise.
So what you have is a cell that's either on or off.
And a neuron really wants to make sure
that it stays off until it's ready to send a signal.
So that's how the neuron stays quiet.
And when we talk about that in biology,
we talk about the neuron keeping a resting potential,
a resting quiet level of activity.
So how does a neuron do that?
So the way that neurons communicate
and the way that they send on electrical signals
is going to be through the movement
of these chemicals called ions.
For those of you who are not science people,
just think of them as charged chemicals.
We're just going to talk about general ions
for today, which are charged atoms.
So they can have a positive charge or a negative charge.
And we're going to talk about mostly positive charges today.
So the neuron has to keep quiet.
And the way it does that is by keeping
positive charges, positive ions outside of the neurons.
So you have all of these positive ions sitting
there outside of the neuron.
And this is how it stays quiet.
Because the flow of these ions is going to be what
communicates the signal.
So how does it do that?
It keeps these ions out of the cell by using these pumps.
So it has pumps that will pump out
positive charges from the inside of the cell
to the outside of the cell.
So by using those pumps, the neuron
is keeping all of the positive charges, all
of the positive ions mostly on the outside of the cell,
rather than on the inside.
So that means that the net charge
on the inside of the cell is going to be negative.
So you've got this imbalance.
And this is how the neuron stays quiet,
how it make sure that it is not firing.
So you've got this cell sitting there trying to figure out
if it's going to fire or not.
Right now it's quiet.
How does the whole process get started to make it fire?
So if you have another neuron up here--
and you'll hear a lot more about this from Anthony--
sending out a chemical signal, that chemical signal
is going to get received at the dendrites.
And when that chemical-- called a neurotransmitter-- hits
a particular receptor out on the dendrite,
that receptor is going to open up a channel.
And that channel is going to let some of these positive ions
in, just like receiving email.
It's receiving a signal.
So you get these positive ions going into the dendrite.
And you get a change in charge.
The neuron is now getting more positive on the inside.
Before it was really negative.
Now, it's getting a little less negative.
Another way to say that is it was really polarized before.
It had a big negative charge on the inside.
And now, it's getting a little bit depolarized.
It's getting some positive charge going into it.
Great.
So you've got a little bit of charge coming in.
You've got a little bit of signal.
But somehow the neuron has to decide, am I going to fire?
Or am I not?
It's all or nothing, one or the other.
So you get the signal coming in from this dendrite.
And you're going to get some positive charge going in,
flowing into the neuron.
And you'll get a little bit out in the cell body.
But from one signal sent, you might not get a lot.
Well, let's say you're getting really, really
frequent chemical messages from here,
getting lots of positive charge into the cell.
Or you're getting several different messages
at the same time, getting lots of positive charge
into the cell.
Then, you can end up with enough positive charge down here
at the axon hillock to make the neuron decide to fire.
So what is it that makes it decide?
There are more channels down here
that can open up to let more positive ions in.
And the way they make that decision is whether there's
enough positive charge.
If there's enough positive charge, they open up.
And they allow lots more of this positive ion to go in.
And once that happens, it's going to feed forward.
Right?
You're going to get more positive ion going in.
You're going to get more of these channels opening
because the positive ions are going in.
And it's going to keep going and feed forward.
And you're going to get the neuron sending a signal.
And the way it does that is it keeps
having positive ions go in all the way down the axon,
all the way down to the terminal.
And then, when you get positive ions going into the terminal,
it's going to tell that to go ahead and send
a chemical message on to the next cell
and start the whole process over again.
But the big message from all of this
is that this decision that's made here is all or nothing.
You've got positive ions that are traveling in.
If they don't get to the threshold here,
if they don't get enough of them here
to make the axon hillock decide to let more of them in,
the cell's going to stay quiet.
If they do get enough in to reach threshold,
then you're going to get lots more pouring in.
And the cell's going to fire.
There's no turning back.
It's going to send the signal down its axon to the terminal.
And you're going to get the message sent on.
And that's called an action potential.
And what happens here is you get all this positive charge going
in.
You get the cell getting to a really positive level
of charge.
And then, somehow it has to stop.
So how does it stop?
You have a number of other positive ions on the inside.
And right after this opens and you
get all of these ones pouring in,
you can get the cell opening up these other channels
to let the positive ions, a different kind of them,
flow out.
And then, you get restoration of the balance and charge.
And remember, you have these pumps
that continue to send the positive ions out of the cell.
So you get the cell being restored to the quiet state
afterwards where it's negative on the inside compared
to the outside.
So there you have it.
You have an all-or-nothing action potential.
You have the cell deciding at the axon hillock
whether it's going to fire it or not
and then sending the message on to the next cell.
So that's a really basic understanding
of how a neuron fires.
Hopefully, that was basic enough that everybody
could understand it.
You're going to hear more about it later in other lectures.
But for now, that should give you a really basic overview
of what's going on.
So take-home messages from this first part
of the lecture, different parts of the brain
do different things.
As we talked about when we were looking
at the brain and spinal cord, you've
got the different parts that function
for different behaviors.
You'll hear a lot more about that in the future
as we talk about specific behaviors
and what parts of the brain have to do with them.
You've also got different cells that
are doing different functions within the brain.
You've got neurons.
You've got glia.
You've got different types of neurons as well.
You'll hear a lot more about how some neurons send
one type of chemical signal, some send another,
and how that's going to be really
important to different behaviors later on.
You also learned that neurons are individual cells making
this decision.
They're the functional unit of the nervous system,
as we learned from Ramon y Cajal.
And finally, when they do decide to send that signal,
it's an all-or-nothing process.
It's an all-or-nothing action potential
that makes the sell send on the message to the next one.
So hopefully, if you understood all of that,
you have a really basic understanding of neuroscience.
We're going to take a five minute break.
And then, we'll move on to Anthony's lecture, which
will talk more about what actually happens at the synapse
as we think about applying this to behavior.
Thanks.
[SIDE CONVERSATION]
All right.
My name is Anthony.
I am a first year biology student, a graduate student
in the PhD program.
Right now, I'm just wandering from lab
to lab trying to figure out what I want to do research in.
Again, like Nathan, there's going
to be some topics in here that might confuse you.
And if it is confusing, let me know.
Stop me.
Ask questions.
My email is on the handout that you
can download from CourseWorks.
And after the lecture, I'll actually
write it down on the bulletin board right there.
But feel free to send me or Nathan an email anytime
if you have any questions over the lectures today.
I'm going to start by recapping a little bit about what
Nathan talked about, the neuron doctrine.
So up until the late 1800s, neurons
were all thought to be connected by cytoplasm.
And really the concept of a neuron
as an individual cell, it was difficult to conceptualize.
Because all people were really able to observe
was this mesh-like network of interconnecting
fibers and processes.
And it wasn't until the advance of microscopy
and staining that people were able to suspect that something
else was going on here, that maybe this story
was a little bit different.
In 1891, a German anatomist named Heinrich Wihelm Gottfried
von Waldeyer-Hartz--
[LAUGHTER]
I practiced that-- proposed what is now
referred to as the neuron doctrine, which is basically
that this network was made up of individual cells.
He wasn't unable to propose this without work
done by many others, including Santiago Ramon y
Cajal, god of neuroscience.
So if you have these separate neurons that are separate
cells, if one is to communicate to another,
it cannot happen by electrical means only.
If you think about it, if this communication is to happen,
it must happen by chemical means.
And so before the events at the synapse can really take place,
I have to introduce you-- sort of back up
and go back to the action potential, which
if you remember, starts here at the axon hillock.
So this is where the decision to fire or not fire an action
potential will be made.
And once the action potential is fired,
it will travel along the length of the axon
and reach a dead end that is conveniently
called the axon terminal.
Now, the axon terminal is a structure
at the end of the axon that stores large amounts
of neurotransmitters.
And these neurotransmitters aren't just
freely floating or diffusing around inside the cell.
They're actually packaged in these discrete quantities
in these membranous spherical structures called vesicles.
And so you'll see those balls housing these black dots.
The balls are the vesicles.
And the black dots are the neurotransmitters.
OK.
So when the axon potential reaches this axon terminal,
it will trigger an influx of positive charge, which
will then trigger the release of neurotransmitter
from these vesicles.
So the vesicles will move to the edge of the axon terminal.
And they'll dump their neurotransmitter out.
So I have to sort of dive into a little bit of terminology here.
We try to avoid that with this class.
But the signaling neuron is called the presynaptic neuron.
The neuron that receives the signal
is called the postsynaptic neuron.
And the junction at which these two neurons
connect and communicate is called the synapse.
So once this neuron is bound to the receptor,
it can trigger one of two temporal effects.
One can be an immediate effect, which
is the opening of a channel, which
will allow ions to jump in, which Nathan illustrated
earlier right here.
These ions could either be positively charged
or negatively charged.
If they're positively charged, they
will persuade an action potential
to happen if there are enough of these charges.
If it's a negative charge, it might
act to dissuade an action potential to be
initiated at the axon hillock.
So that's the immediate effect.
But an effect that might last a little bit longer
is when a genomic effect is induced.
So a neurotransmitter might be released.
And it might bind to a receptor.
And this event might influence the activation
of a transcription factor.
And this transcription factor might induce the production
of more receptor channels that might find
its way onto the dendrite here.
So if you think about it, if you produce more channels or more
receptors, you can make this synapse
more responsive to the same amount of neurotransmitter.
So that's strengthening the synapse.
And you'll hear, definitely, more about that
later in future lectures.
So not only can a single neuron respond to many different types
of neurotransmitters, could be inhibitory,
could be excitatory, it is also possible
for a single neurotransmitter to have
an effect on multiple neuron types located
in different areas of the brain with different functions.
And so you might ask yourself, how is this possible?
So we have like 100 billion neurons in our brain.
Why is it that we don't have 100 billion
unique neurotransmitters for each brain-- or sorry,
for each neuron?
And the concept can be sort of related
to the concept of the alphabet.
So we only have 26 letters in our alphabet.
Yet, we can create an infinite number of messages.
The idea of the brain having different functions
in different areas, each of these functions
are going to be-- they're going to have different functions
because different neural networks, different networks
of neurons are going to be responsible
for these functions.
And they are actually going to, for the most part, have
a physical separation between different areas,
different neural networks of the brain with different functions.
And so it is possible to use a single type of neurotransmitter
in many areas of the brain with different functions because
of this physical separation.
Sorry.
I was opposed to put this slide up.
So we call this compartmentalization
of the brain, many different functions
in many different physical areas.
And so because of this redundant use of neurotransmitter,
you really don't need more than a few hundred.
That's where the current estimate lies.
Not all of them have been discovered.
Quite a few have been.
But there are still a lot out there
that have yet to be discovered.
And so this brings me to sort of a exercise
that we could do to help hammer in certain-- these properties
of a neurotransmitter.
Say you are a scientist.
And say you are in the business of identifying
novel neurotransmitters.
And you have this putative molecule.
And you want to prove to the scientific community
that this molecule is a neurotransmitter.
What pieces of evidence might you
need to provide to prove that your molecule's
a neurotransmitter?
First thing that you sort of have
to do is you have to sort of ask yourself, well,
where are neurotransmitters located?
They are just located anywhere in the brain.
They're located in specific areas.
They're located in the axon terminal.
So you have to prove that it localizes in the axon terminal.
Another thing that you might want to ask
is, what triggers the action of a neurotransmitter?
So you're going to also have to demonstrate its release
following an action potential.
So if you remember, an action potential
will hit the axon terminal and through a series of events
trigger the release of neurotransmitter.
And lastly-- but this is not good enough.
So you have two pieces of evidence so far.
But you need one more to make a pretty strong case for why
you have a neurotransmitter.
And this is you have to ask the question, what
is the effect of a neurotransmitter?
And so you also have to prove that after a neurotransmitter
is released and it binds to the receptor
that it induces some sort of influx of charge
in the postsynaptic dendrite.
And I just missed another slide.
No I didn't.
So fortunately for us, a lot of this work
identifying neurotransmitters has already been done.
And there are a few notable transmitters,
neurotransmitters that I kind of want to get
you guys familiarized with.
And so right now, you don't have to memorize
any of the functions that I'm going to talk about.
So the whole purpose is to sort of
to introduce you to some neurotransmitters
so if you hear about them in later lectures,
it won't be the first time you hear about them.
So one type of neurotransmitter is called dopamine.
And it's most commonly associated with the reward
system, with pleasure.
But dopamine, like many other neurotransmitters,
has a very diverse array of functions.
It's not just involved in reward or pleasure.
And so just a quick recap.
How could it have many different functions?
Well, if the brain is compartmentalized,
if these networks are physically-- for the most
part physically separated, you can
have one type of neurotransmitter
with an effect in these different areas of the brain.
Therefore, one type of neurotransmitter in an organism
may have many different functions.
And dopamine is no exception to that.
You have another type of neurotransmitter
called epinephrine.
And I know everyone in this room has heard about it
in one form or another.
Another way to-- another word for epinephrine is adrenaline.
And so adrenaline is involved in the fight or flight response.
So if you're-- Nathan also talked about this earlier--
if you come across a risky situation or you're feeling
threatened you can either fight off and vanquish your foe.
Or you can flee, neither of which are bad ideas.
And norepinephrine, which you may hear about later
on in the course, is pretty much interchangeable
with epinephrine.
They share a very similar structure.
And you don't really need to do much to change
epinephrine to norepinephrine and vice versa.
So another neurotransmitter that you might hear about later on
is serotonin.
And serotonin again, is one of those neurotransmitters
that has a lot of functions.
And few of them are involved in the regulation
of sleep, appetite, and mood.
But certainly it's not limited to those.
Acetylcholine, I know you'll hear about it on Friday.
And so I'll leave that for Friday for you to discover.
GABA is-- and you really can't talk about neurotransmitters
without talking about GABA and glutamate.
So these are the two most common neurotransmitters in the brain.
GABA is the most common inhibitory neurotransmitter.
And glutamate is the most common excitatory neurotransmitter.
And again, these two have very diverse functions
and are involved in many different areas.
So I'm going to, for a brief moment, dive into a tangent
and tell you about the neuromuscular junction.
You cannot have animal behavior-- in fact,
you can't even behave unless you are able to move.
And the basis behind movement lies in the muscle,
in the contraction of muscles.
So what you're going to see here is a similar motif.
You're going to see a synapse.
You're going to see a neurotransmitter.
The synapse is going to occur on the nerve that
signals to the muscle.
It's going to release the neurotransmitter, which
is actually going to be oftentimes acetylcholine.
And it's going to bind to receptors
in the muscle, which is going to trigger a contraction.
And so unlike many neurons in the brain, which
respond to multiple different neurotransmitters in general,
neuromuscular junctions only use one type.
So with that out of the way, I'm sort
of going to dive into neuropharmacology.
So what is neuropharmacology?
It is the external manipulation of synaptic events.
Why would people want to manipulate a synaptic event?
Well, you can do it for research purposes.
You could manipulate the neurotransmitter
or the receptor to figure out more
about what their functions are.
Or you could do it to correct for disease states.
We as humans are very interested in trying to help people
who have certain illnesses.
So the general purpose is to increase or decrease
the strength of communication across a synapse.
So sometimes you can do this by faking out
the postsynaptic neuron.
You can give it a compound, an artificial compound that's
not seen naturally in the body that
closely resembles something that is seen naturally in the body.
And you'll see a lot of hallucinogenics
that utilize this principle.
So hallucinogenics, such as mescaline, LSD, and psilocybin,
these interact with the serotonin
receptors because they have very similar structure to serotonin.
And so there are a variety of ways that you can strengthen
the synaptic response.
One of which is to increase the release of neurotransmitter
from the presynaptic neuron.
How might you go about doing this?
You could increase the synthesis of neurotransmitter.
You could force the release-- you
could force the released neurotransmitter
to linger in the synapse.
And there are a variety of ways to do this.
You could block-- wow, I just skipped something.
Oh, don't worry about it.
OK.
So you can block reuptake or degradation.
I can talk about it now.
So when a neurotransmitter has done its job,
has bound to the receptor, is used up,
you can't just leave it in the synapse.
You've got to get rid of it somehow.
Otherwise, it's going to keep signaling to the receptors.
One way to do this is a process called reuptake.
This is essentially, the reinsertion
of a used up neurotransmitter back
into the presynaptic neuron.
OK.
And so there are a variety of proteins
that mediate this process.
You can have protein pumps that pump the neurotransmitter back
into the presynapse.
You can have-- you're going to have proteins
that are required to repackage the neurotransmitters
in the vesicles.
And you're going to be able to-- you're
going to have to reform these vesicles.
And so this is called reuptake.
You can also degrade used up neurotransmitters.
And when you do so, these degradation products
can be detected in certain fluids in your body,
such as cerebral spinal fluid or blood or urine.
And so this is important for when
you want to detect levels of neurotransmitter
when you're trying to diagnose diseases.
So right, so you can force the released neurotransmitter
to linger in the synapse by blocking either reuptake
or degradation.
You can increase neurotransmitter receptor
activity.
So if the receptor on the postsynapse
has a certain amount of affinity to the neurotransmitter, if you
are able to find some way to make it bind
more efficiently to the neurotransmitter,
you're able to amplify the neurotransmitter signal
and essentially, strengthen that synaptic response.
So conversely, if you would like to weaken synaptic response,
you could just block any of the processes that
are required to release neurotransmitter, that
are required for the neurotransmitter
to bind to the receptor and trigger this influx of charge
in the dendrite.
So you can do that by blocking neurotransmitter receptors,
blocking neurotransmitter release.
You can block, or you can decrease the receptor affinity.
So again, we don't really want you
to focus on memorizing really the many mechanisms of doing
this.
If you do need to know it, it will come up later
on in the course.
But what this really is-- the whole point of this
is to get you thinking about the many ways in which you
can manipulate events that take place at the synapse.
OK.
So there are a lot of ways people can manipulate it.
So how would you find out more about some neuropathology?
If somebody has something wrong with them
and it's going on in their brain,
it's really difficult to make direct measurements
of neurotransmitters, or neurotransmitter
levels in their brain, especially in a live patient.
These measurements are often done in breakdown products,
breakdown products of neurotransmitters in the urine,
in the blood, or cerebral spinal fluid.
And these are often serving as clues.
These can often serve as clues.
So if you had a patient with Parkinson's and you would like
to treat that patient and alleviate that
person's symptoms, you might find it pretty difficult.
So Parkinson's- people with Parkinson's have
an insufficient or decreased level of dopamine in a certain
area of their brain that controls motor movement.
And if you were to increase, globally increase,
dopamine levels in the brain, you might fix,
you might alleviate the symptoms of Parkinson's.
But you're going to be increasing it everywhere
else that dopamine has an action in, has a function in.
And so you might change levels in the mesolimbic pathway
from normal to too high and induce symptoms
that resemble schizophrenia.
And so this really harks back on the theme
that we've been trying to tell you that the brain is
compartmentalized.
It's got different functions in different areas.
It can have the same neurotransmitter
in these different areas functioning.
And if you were to treat some sort of effect
that you want to fix, you might see adverse or deleterious side
effects in other areas.
Yeah, so that's pretty much all I have.
So there are a few take home messages and important points.
You have to know that this process of axon--
the process of action potential moving along the axon
and how it influences the influx of positive ions
at the axon terminal, which will release neurotransmitter.
So you have to be familiar with that concept.
You have to understand that neurotransmitters after they're
used up can be degraded or recycled
in a process called reuptake and that degraded products can
be detected in blood, urine, and cerebral spinal fluid.
You also have to understand this idea, again,
of compartmentalization.
It's very important.
And that pharmacological manipulations,
you have to be careful because things
could happen that you are not expecting,
especially when something is wrong in only one
area of the brain.
And with that, you guys are free to leave and/or ask questions.
We do have one more thing we wanted to show.
Oh yes.
One of the other TAs in our class
last year made an absolutely wonderful video
about the synapse and about the synaptic cleft, in particular.
And we wanted to share this with you.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
--[SINGING] HumBio kids, put your books down.
Put your books down.
And report to the cleft, the synaptic cleft.
I'm B Bobby Voltage introducing the Glut-tang Clan.
-Check out the synaptic cleft.
Thanks to vesicular trafficking, interneuronal signal
can be transmitted from electrical to chemical
and back again.
-Hot and turns to the land of the nerve
where firing and wiring will occur and will occur.
will occur.
Follow me.
Neurons gotta be ready to fire at any opportunity.
Dendritic input make it hot.
Make it hot.
Sum it up in the axon hillock.
The potential will rise to a constant size.
Shape of action potentials ain't no surprise.
Snap back to the focus of the rap, tiny little space aka
synapse.
-Boom.
-Voltage sweeps through the end like a broom.
Calcium rushes in.
Vesicles go boom.
-Boom.
-Exocytosis so exciting.
ACH bonds light it up like lightning.
Synapse fanatics gather around.
Questions about the story?
What?
-3, 2.
Hmm.
Do the transmitters always excite?
-No.
They can be inhibitory, depending
on whether they're the ions of [INAUDIBLE] positive charge
gone.
-Only one synapse?
What if there's more?
-The hillock will sum it up, like I said before.
The synapse is the location for neuron to neuron communication.
Remember what Russ Fernald said.
-The mind arises from the brain.
-Now listen.
-Open.
Open.
Close.
Close.
-Check out the synaptic cleft.
But thanks to vesicular trafficking--
-Ion channels.
- --interneuronal signals can be transmitted from electrical
to chemical and back again.
-Ion channels.
-S to the "ynapse" is where things
act like [INAUDIBLE] to chemicals that
make you relax or collapse.
The synapse cleft has receptors that rock to the sympathetic.
Ligands [INAUDIBLE] by clinics that
mimic your chemical condition.
That's a small problem for medicine,
a hundred trillion synapses.
Drugs screaming--
-Let us in!
-The disease is only one part of the brain.
A pill's not a sniper.
It's a hand grenade.
It'll act wherever there reside effects plus everywhere
else come side effects.
Don't want to sound like a cynic.
We've all got a protein they call nicotinic.
It's a receptor that can't tell the diff between ACH
and nicotine.
-Get a grip.
-But nicotine leads to too much binding.
ACH receptors get to hiding.
Neuromuscular junction, it can't quite
function because your receptors went out to lunch.
Now, dopamine's on for a [? war ?] prediction.
But it's down-regulating, then you're getting addicted.
Fixing to kick the habit.
We're busting synapses.
How tragic.
-Synaptic receptors getting abducted.
-A healthy synapse ain't nothing to mug with.
-I hope this rap has been instructive.
-Because a healthy synapse ain't nothing to mug with.
-Open.
Open.
Close.
Close.
-You don't have to leave your [INAUDIBLE].
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
-Close.
Close.
Open.
Open.
Close.
Close.
-Ion channels.
-Cajal, give me some more neurons to study.
Those don't ensure our find.
-Ion channels.
-Open.
Open.
Close.
Close.
Open.
Open.
Open.
Close.
Close.
Open.
Open.
Close.
Close.
-A game of chess is like a sword fight.
[DRAWING A SWORD]
You must think first before you move.
 I would like to get started, please.
So my name is Patrick House.
I am a neuroscience PhD student.
I work with Robert in Robert's lab.
I'm a first year.
And I study something that you guys will eventually
hear about, but I don't want to ruin the punchline.
But today we're going to talk about memory and plasticity.
And so two days ago on Wednesday,
you guys all sat in here, in this room.
And you learned, some of you for the first time,
some of you for maybe the 10th time, the basics
of neurobiology, of how a neuron works,
how a neuron-- you have a presynaptic cell,
you have a postsynaptic cell, and this kind
of simplified version of the communication and information
transfer.
And something interesting happened
between now and then, which is that now you
sit in the same room.
And something about you knows something about neuroscience
now.
You heard one of the TAs talk.
You slept on it.
And then you come back now and you
have assimilated, integrated into your identity,
into what you know, new facts.
And this lecture is about how you do that.
And to kind of get at what memory is,
we need to think about a lot of different ways
in which it's interesting, and a lot of different spectrums
and severities about memory.
So why is it that some memories last our entire lives,
whereas other memories, we hear and they're fleeting?
They go away in a second.
Why is it that someone sitting next to you in bed,
telling you a story, and as you go
to sleep you can't remember it?
As you wake up, you can't remember your dreams.
But if that exact same person, that exact same story
was told to you as they were sitting next to you in a car,
and you get into a car accident, suddenly
that memory becomes salient.
You may remember it for years, if not your entire life.
And you may actually associate either the story itself,
the voice of the person, with that traumatic event.
And you might get post-traumatic stress disorder.
So if the mechanism is the same between these two
types of memory, between ones that are fleeting and forgetful
and ones that last your entire life, the question is,
how does environment, how does context
fit into shaping these types of memories?
And so in order to understand that,
we have to kind of get at, what are the mechanisms of memory?
And how are these contextually motivated?
So I want introduce to you first Stephen Wiltshire,
who is an architect, if not in practice, at least in mind.
He is an autistic savant.
And he has been mute since age three.
And he has this remarkable capacity, which I'm actually
going to test you guys on slightly here, if you have
any kind of inclination to sketch,
or you happen to have some sketch paper with you.
I want you to-- this will take approximately 60 seconds
to span across all of Rome-- draw it
from memory in your 60 seconds.
Because Stephen Wiltshire has this amazing capacity
to take helicopter rides-- he's done this over Tokyo.
He's done this over New York.
He's done this over Rome and over London.
And in 20 minutes, he can then sit down
and recreate every single building, every single column,
every single window in correct proportions,
from the correct angle in which the helicopter ride was.
And so you may be thinking-- OK, your 60 seconds are almost up.
Can you guys do it?
You may be thinking-- if any of you are artists out there,
you may be thinking this is unfair.
Why can't I do this?
And as neuroscientists, our first thought
is, OK, this is unfair.
Why can't I do this?
But really, it can tell us something
interesting about memory.
So you come at it with two questions.
First question-- before and after this helicopter ride,
what is different in Stephen's brain?
And second, on this theme of individual variation
that we keep harping on in class, why is it that he can
do this and we can't do this?
And these are two important questions
that if we could answer those questions,
we would know a lot about what memory is.
And so it really makes sense to go back
to what it is that we know so far about neurons,
the basics of one neuron and how it is activated.
And so we have a presynaptic cell,
and we have a postsynaptic cell.
And in our simplified version, we can kind of know now--
and what I'm going to tell you is that memory,
learning happens, to the best of our knowledge, in the synapse,
in the space between the pre and the postsynaptic cell.
But to understand why it is that we think that, we kind of need
to go back about 100 years to when people,
scientists, neuroscientists were investigating the brain,
investigating memory.
And they thought that the smallest unit of the brain
that they knew was the neuron.
So because of our tendency to explain
what we don't know in terms are the smallest unit of thing
that we do know, they thought OK,
this makes sense-- a memory is a new neuron.
And when you learn a new fact, when
you learn the basics of neuroscience,
you are growing new neurons.
And each individual fact is associated with one new neuron.
For instance, they may have thought
that OK, you guys learned on Wednesday that the axon
hillock is the site of the generation of the action
potential.
So then that is a new fact, and then a new neuron
would then be formed.
I just realized that that actually might not make sense,
because at the time that they thought that, they didn't know
what an axon hillock is, so maybe that formulation
doesn't even make sense.
But the idea is that a couple decades later, people
discovered the synapse.
They discovered that neurons were not just
one interconnected thing, that there is space.
There is a gap between them.
And as soon as they discovered the synapse, that
then became the smallest bit of information
we knew about the brain.
And then theories came out saying, well, no, memory
must be the formation of synapses.
So the dogma at the time was then that OK, new fact, axon
hillock.
What does this mean in the brain?
You can see this in the brain.
This takes the shape of a new synapse being formed.
And what we think of now is that well, this isn't exactly right,
because new synapses are not being formed all the time.
And new neurons are not formed in the adult brain, which
isn't entirely true, but we'll get back to that.
But the idea is just that memory and storage of learning,
what I'm going to tell you is that it's in the synapse,
and that it involves modulation and change of the synapse.
And why do we think that?
Because we understand the molecules.
And we understand at a molecular level
what's happening in a synapse when it changes.
So that it is thus now our smallest level
of understanding of the brain.
And so of course, we think oh, well that's
probably where memory is.
So that's the dogma that we're going to start with.
And we're going to start with this idea
that memory is synaptic plasticity.
Memory is when the space between the
presynaptic and postsynaptic neuron changes in some way.
And not only that, it changes in one direction.
It gets stronger.
It's strengthened.
And so what this means is that if you
have your presynaptic neuron and you fire it,
and you get some amount of response,
that over time, if you give enough presynaptic activation
in a certain time window, that you will then get a heightened,
strengthened response in your postsynaptic cell eventually.
And that is the kind of mechanism,
the overarching, broad mechanism of LTP.
And so what we need to do to understand memory
is to focus on the synapse.
So what we get is our classical picture, which
is that you have your synapse.
And a neurotransmitter is coming out.
And that neurotransmitter is excitatory.
And in your postsynaptic cell, what you're getting is
you're getting a small amount of activation.
You're getting current that comes into that cell.
You're getting ions, some sort of response
for any individual piece of neurotransmitter.
So what this is, is a version, a simplified version,
of what is called Hebbian plasticity.
And so there's this guy Hebb, which you have to know.
There's a few of names you have to know in neuroscience,
and he's one of them.
And Hebb came up with this idea, the only bumper sticker
that neuroscientists ever have on their car, which
is that neurons that fire together wire together.
And what this is saying is that you have your standard picture
of a very, very simplified version of a presynaptic cell
that's releasing an excitatory neurotransmitter,
and that when it does so, you get a response
in your postsynaptic cell.
So if you will remember from one lecture ago,
that excitatory neurotransmitter is glutamate,
though if you're going to spend any time
and energy into remembering one neurotransmitter that
might be relevant for the class, this is
the one you want to remember.
You don't have to remember it.
So mostly, the idea is just that it's excitatory.
And why is this important?
Because information is transferred in the brain
through activation.
And in order to transfer information,
you need excitatory neurotransmitters.
You need your neurons to be activated.
But as we know from what I've told you
so far, that repetition is what drives memory,
I would suggest that you remember that glutamate
is the excitatory, and one and only neurotransmitter
that you have to know.
Say there's a test question that says,
what is the one excitatory neurotransmitter
in the brain that you have to know?
You would respond glutamate.
And then you would be right.
And so you can imagine that for this type of simplified
diagram, if we were to strengthen
the synapse, if we were to get some sort of plasticity,
some sort of change, potentiation,
you could think of a few ways of doing this.
You could take the presynaptic neuron
and change how much excitatory neurotransmitter is released.
You could change how much glutamate is released.
And presumably, if you release more of the little circles
with positive charge in them, then you're
going to get more activation in the postsynaptic cell.
Another thing you could do is basic neurochemistry
in this diagram, is that each of those neurotransmitters
is binding to a receptor on the postsynaptic cell.
And so what you can do is take that individual receptor.
And you can make it respond more to a single, individual unit
quanta of neurotransmitter.
Alternately, you could just increase
the number of postsynaptic receptors on your cell.
And all of these would be mechanisms by which
you could take this very, very simple synapse
and potentiate it, such that you get the same release,
you get the same neurotransmitter.
And what you get is subtle, because LTP is often
very subtle.
You'll just notice that the response is slightly larger,
a slightly larger response given the same amount of input,
given the same amount of output of the presynaptic cell.
And this is the entire idea of LTP, long-term potentiation,
this idea that at your individual synapse,
you can potentiate it.
You can change it.
It is plastic.
But there should be one large red flag
here, which is-- one of these caveats
is, well, your presynaptic neuron,
how does it know whether or not LTP should be undergone?
How does it know whether or not LTP has been induced?
This requires a kind of communication
between both the pre and the postsynaptic cell,
that how would the presynaptic cell, which has already
released its neurotransmitter, know?
And what you get is this kind of heretical type
of neurotransmitter that can actually-- we
call it a retrograde neurotransmitter--
that can actually be sent back from the postsynaptic cell.
And it's a gas.
Nitric oxide is an example of one.
It's what you get at your dentist.
And it kind of goes back and diffuses
back across the synapse and actually modulates
how much neurotransmitter gets released
from the presynaptic cell.
So we have these mechanisms.
We have these mechanisms of LTP.
And the question then is, where does this happen in the brain?
And why is it that we believe that these
are the places of LTP?
And one of the things you need to know--
this is our first dive into neuroanatomy--
is you need to know the hippocampus.
It was introduced to you last lecture.
But if there's one neurotransmitter you
need to know, it's glutamate.
And if there's one neural anatomical structure
you need to know at this point, it's the hippocampus.
I'm kind of always jealous of these autistic savants that
can memorize 10,000 digits of pi, and take a helicopter ride
and then fully recreate the cityscape of any city they see.
And if you read interviews about how they do it,
it's really interesting.
So what they seem to do is not memorize
just a sheet of a bunch of digits, a string of 10,000
digits of pi.
They'll take a walk through their childhood town.
And they'll say that they put one of the digits
on each and every object.
So your mailbox will be the first digit,
and then your neighbor's door will be another,
and then their window will be three.
And then they are not re-conceiving
and reconstructing just a sheet of boring numbers.
They're taking spatial tours through their memory.
And what this always compels me to do
is make these kind of visual mnemonics.
So I'm going to give you a visual mnemonic for the one way
you have to remember that the hippocampus is
the site of memory and the site of LTP,
insofar as this class is concerned, which is-- OK,
hippo horse.
We learned that last time, it looks kind of like a seahorse.
But that doesn't really make sense.
What if you think about this?
What if you think about the hippodrome back in Rome?
Hippodrome is the circular arena where
you had your little chariot races, because of horses.
And there's two different scenarios
that I want you to imagine.
The first is-- you guys remember Michael Jordan and Larry Bird?
They had this commercial where they played Horse.
And what they were doing is they were playing-- you
have to make a basketball shot.
And then the next one, you have to remember
what that first person did exactly,
and you have to recreate it.
So what I like to imagine is Larry Bird and Michael Jordan
playing a game of horse in the hippodrome, back in Rome.
And then you can kind of get this idea of how memory
is related to the hippocampus.
and this horse structure.
And if that doesn't work for you,
I have one more, which is actually
my favorite, which is you can imagine
the entire amphitheatre, the entire hippodrome filled
with people.
And there was that one emperor who named his horse a senator.
Do you guys know who that is?
What's his name.
I don't know his name.
Caligula.
Caligula, there you go.
So imagine the entire hippodrome is filled with people.
And Caligula is there.
And he gets his senator horse in the middle of the field.
And the horse is sitting kind of cross-legged.
And he's typing out your memoirs on a typewriter.
And that is how you're going to remember
that the hippocampus, the hippodrome, the horse,
is where memory is formed.
So now you guys are all autistic savants now.
Really though, what we need to determine
is, why is it that we really think
that the hippocampus is the site of LTP and memory formation?
It turns out that there is actually adult neurogenesis
and adult plasticity.
So in the last 10 years, we've discovered
that the adult brain really does actually form new neurons.
And for the last 100 years, we kind of disregarded that
and said those guys who initially believed
that every new neuron is associated with every new fact,
those guys were just totally wrong and ridiculous.
What a ridiculous concept.
And so perhaps eventually, in the future,
we will have to incorporate this idea
that there does seem to be some neurogenesis in the brain.
But much like how we learned that there
is non-genetic inherited traits, which we had learned
from the disreputable Lamarck, way back in Lamarckian
evolution, that there is no-- for 100 years,
we thought, no, it's impossible.
There is no non-genetic inheritance of traits.
But it turns out that, well, OK, we
do seem to have some kind of non-genetic inheritance.
And so Lamarck isn't entirely wrong.
And it turns out this is a kind of similar thing, where
the people of most disrepute are often just a little bit right.
So probably, people that used to think
that adult neurogenesis has something to do with memory
are probably a little bit right.
But we're going to stick with the canon, which
is that LTP happens, and that it happens not
on the level of the neuron, not on the level of the synapse,
but on the level of the plasticity of the synapse.
And so why do we think it's the hippocampus?
We get at it from a few ways.
The first way is that HM, this kind of well-dressed epileptic
who had his hippocampi removed.
And what happened was he had selective removal
of just his hippocampi.
And he could no longer remember anything at all.
He could not form new memories whatsoever.
So with these types of conclusions,
in addition to evidence that if you watch and record
from neurons in the hippocampus as you're giving someone
a learning task, then you see LTP.
If you pharmacologically block LTP,
you see changes in the hippocampus.
And so all these pieces of evidence
are trying to get at the idea that the hippocampus is
necessary for memory and memory consolidation.
But if you introspect a little bit,
you can probably realize that well, we
undergo all kinds of forms of learning and memory.
We have motor learning.
We learn how to shoot baskets.
We learn how to throw darts.
We understand emotionally that events
that are more emotionally salient are more memorable.
And so how is it that these types of things
are also encoded in our brain, also
encoded in the same region, the one region, the hippocampus?
And what that turns out to be is that, well, it's
not just that one region.
LTP is happening all over the brain,
that if you look in your emotional regulation centers,
if you look in your emotional cortices, you also see LTP.
And this makes sense, because these types of memories
have to have different methods of storage and retrieval.
And also, that you can imagine this type of excitation,
this type of synaptic plasticity, can go wrong.
In post-traumatic stress disorder,
for instance, you get LTP.
And you get LTP that is severe.
And you get severe LTP potentiation of your synapses
in those emotion regulation centers that
create a situation where the context leads to memories that
shouldn't necessarily be brought up,
that shouldn't necessarily be retrieved.
And so we see this mechanism for types of behavior that we know,
types of things like why certain memories,
certain emotionally salient memories last for a long time,
and others don't.
And we can also imagine that this
is a physiological process, and that it
can go wrong, occasionally.
We all know that memories are degraded,
sometimes intentionally so, sometimes unintentionally so,
that there are certain things we want to remember.
And despite any and all repetition about glutamate
being the excitatory transmitter,
we just don't remember them.
And there are some that just kind of fade away into time,
into the oceans.
And what is happening is that there
are mechanisms for intentional disruption of LTP.
And you can think of a few.
So hypoglycemic states, if you are really, really hungry,
you get insulin cascades that end up reducing LTP.
If you're starving, it's not a good time
to try to remember things.
It's a good time to try to go out
and expend energy finding food.
As we'll learn later in lectures,
there are some stress hormones.
And these stress hormones actually
give us a selective memory advantage in the short term.
If you're in a car crash, you remember the slow motion
details of the entire event.
And this has to do with these stress hormones,
these fear hormones coming out and saying,
OK, well, we want to be able to remember this moment
so we can learn from it next time, if we survive.
But if you do this chronically, if you do this for a long time
window throughout the lifetime of the organism,
then you can actually get damage to LTP and damage to memory.
So it's about time window.
It's about the same mechanisms that
can enhance memory can also be deleterious eventually.
Another probably more familiar one,
perhaps not to the introverts, but perhaps
to the extroverts in the crowd, is
that if this lecture were on Saturday morning,
I could probably ask you guys what you did last night.
And some of you would not be able to tell me
with delicate accuracy what happened on Friday.
And you might not be able to tell me the story
that was read to you at bedtime, or even
who read you the story at bedtime.
And this is because ethanol, alcohol, directly disrupts LTP.
And we see this.
And we see this in the hippocampus.
And these are the types of things, behaviors,
that we know of.
We know that emotionally salient memories last longer.
We know that alcohol somewhat-- there
are differential effects of types of substances on memory.
We know that it's hard to remember things right
before we go to sleep.
And so what's interesting is, can we
get at a physiology that explains all of these things?
And so I'm going to give you 60 more seconds-- there's
going to be a pop quiz at the end,
by the way-- you have 60 more seconds to do this.
And what is interesting here is that when we get down
to these physiological mechanisms,
we have two ends of a spectrum.
We have HM and we have Stephen Wiltshire,
someone who cannot form any memories whatsoever,
and then someone who can do this in a 20-minute helicopter ride,
recreate the entire landscape.
And the question is, the theme of this class
is often one of individual variation.
How is it that one person can not
be able to form any memories whatsoever?
How is it that one person can have
an autistic, photographic memory?
And where do we fit?
Where does memory fit in a properly functioning way?
And like most of the spectrums that
are introduced into this class, one
of imprinted genes, tournament versus pair-bonding species,
things like that, the answer turns out to be we
are somewhere in the middle between HM,
no hippocampi, no formation of new memories,
and Stephen Wiltshire.
So one more thing we need to discuss
with the theme of this class is that often, we'll
give you a lecture and then maybe in the next lecture,
maybe five minutes later, we'll tell you it's all wrong.
Or we'll say, no, you've been way too myopic.
That's not how you should see these things.
And what we need to do in order to understand somewhat
about the context of memories is to take and expand
your myopic view of this simplified version of a neuron.
So far, we've gone into what a single neuron
functioning looks like.
And we've gone into what a single neuron as it transmits
a signal to another neuron looks like,
how there's a gap in between the pre and the postsynaptic cell,
and what that information transfer looks like,
and how we can change that information transfer, how
we can make it plastic.
But there's a problem here, which
is that if we're trying to learn anything about the brain,
we have to understand that the brain is really complicated,
and that there's 100 billion neurons,
and that sometimes these individual neurons will connect
to 10,000 other neurons.
And sometimes, each of those 10,000 neurons
will have 10,000 neurons that connected to it.
And so the question-- I don't know.
As a neuroscientist, when I look at that, the first thing I do
is want to give up.
And I do.
And then the second thought is OK, maybe
it's time to expand the simplified version
of the neuron that we have.
It's not just one neuron talking to another neuron.
It's not just a single synapse, but that it's
the dynamics of many, many interacting neurons.
And as these dynamics expand, as these dynamics
get introduced into 10,000 neurons at the same time,
10,000 dendrites, dendritic arbors
connecting to 10,000 other axonal processes,
then we see that things that didn't matter
so much in the single, individual neuron actually
matter quite a bit when you're talking
about 100 billion neurons.
So one of the things to introduce here
is the concept of noise into the individual signal transfer,
into the individual information transfer.
A neuron, as we presented it, was
something that fires an action potential,
transmits information.
Every single action potential leads
to neurotransmitter release, which
leads to postsynaptic response.
But these are very delicate things.
An individual neuron is constantly
in flux with how much current is coming in and out.
Ions are flowing around.
It's not as simple as a static neuron that
then gets activated, and then passes on
a message to another static neuron, which
then gets activated.
What you get is often, a lot of times,
you'll get random and spontaneous generation
of signal, of action potentials, and sometimes of current
in the postsynaptic cell.
And one of the major tasks of the brain
is figuring out what is signal, what
is appropriate and meaningful signal, versus what
is this noise.
If you can imagine on a single neural level,
the noise might not have that much impact.
But if you're talking about 100 billion neurons,
you're going to get noise all over the place that will just
lead to this static of noise that you don't know what
to make of the world anymore.
You don't know what to make of the signal.
You don't know what to make of individual neural signals.
And so what we need to do is to start considering neurons
in terms of how they interact in dynamics of groups.
And one of the first ways and the most important ways
to think about this is to understand
that neurons are not just excitatory forces, that
information, yes, is generated by glutamate
and the transfer of excitation, but that neurons
have a capability to inhibit.
And one of the important ways that they differentiate signal
from noise, one of the important ways to learn what is noise
and what is not, is to inhibit.
And I'll explain how it is exactly
that the inhibition works.
But one of the first-- oh, that's pretty high.
One of the first ones to understand
is that a neuron can inhibit itself, which is not really--
it seems like it could initially be some sort of masochism,
but it's really not.
It's just that the neuron is trying to sharpen
the signal that it's sending.
So a neuron is firing and firing, over and over
and over, and what it wants to say,
what it wants to be able to do, is accurately give
a precise description of the signal, of the information.
And what it can do is inhibit itself to say, I'm done.
No more spontaneous noise.
No more spontaneous little bits of current.
I am done with my signal.
And what this is, is it allows for temporal sharpening.
It allows for the ability of a neuron to say,
this was my signal.
It was meaningful.
I really meant it, and inhibit the kinds
of random noise and spontaneous things that could happen.
Another type of inhibition that's
very important to separate noise from not noise
is spatial inhibition.
So what this is, is your individual neuron,
not only can it send processes and inhibit itself,
it can actually send processes out and inhibit its neighbors.
And how might this be useful and important is that it can say,
essentially, OK, this signal is real.
This signal is the signal that I want
to send, the information that I want to transfer.
And not only that, ignore my neighbors.
It's really me.
And what this allows you to do is get spatial sharpening.
So what this allows you to do is say, in the field of things
that you're trying to perceive, a certain neuron
will respond to a certain section of that field.
And what this is saying is, I am activated.
And you inhibit your neighbors so
that you're more sure that your signal is true.
And how can we relate this?
How can we make sense of this?
There's a very simple type of feedback network
that should elaborate this idea, which
is pain and pain sensation.
And so we all probably, at some point in our lives,
presumably, have discovered and felt pain.
And there's two general qualities of pain.
You can have really, really fast, sharp pain.
And you can have this dull, aching, throbbing pain.
And what people found when they investigate
into your spinal cord and into your sensory peripheral
processes is how this pain is generated.
And it's generated on two separate types of neurons.
And one carries fast pain, one carries the sharp, fast stuff.
One carries the slow, dull stuff.
And what you find is that these are intertwined
in this delicate feedback loop, such
that the fast, spiking, first pain will generate,
eventually, the slow-moving pain.
It will fire the other neurons next to it, the neighbors,
and say, OK, also start this slow pain spike.
But then the slow pain spike can come back
and inhibit the first sharp spike, such that it stops.
We're trying to get information about the world.
And your body is trying to do what
it can with that information.
And if you get stung by something,
you want really sharp pain to be like,
hey, pay attention to that.
Make sure it's not a scorpion that's still there.
But you don't need this sharp pain forever.
You want to be able to inhibit it and just say, OK, pay
attention.
But then, just to make sure you don't walk on it
anymore and get it infected, we're
going to make it hurt a little bit.
And so this is your body trying to make the most
of this type of information.
And what it's doing is using lateral inhibition
in this complicated way, actually simple way,
to allow for these two types of transmissions of information.
That was a very simple example.
And I think there's a much more complex example when
we go into the types of complex visual stimuli
that vision gives us.
And you can imagine that lateral inhibition, the same type
of spatial sharpening of a signal,
can come into play as we're trying to figure out and piece
together the visual world.
So what this is doing, what this kind of lateral inhibition
allows for, is it allows for visual neurons to receive input
and then to say, it is me.
This is the signal that I want to send.
Not only that, inhibit the neighbors.
And what this leads to is this emergent property
of these retinal cells that allow
for specific types of signal and allow
for specific types of receptive fields.
So in your eyes, your neurons in the back of your eyes,
if you just stand still, they only
have a certain angle of light that they can get.
And that idea is this idea of receptive fields,
that they are responsible for that field.
And they're responsible for saying,
if there's a signal there, this is what it is.
And this is how it's relevant.
And what this type of lateral inhibition allows you to do
is it allows you to say, OK.
Your neuron gets a signal, and it
wants to say, OK, that's an edge, an edge
detection, contrast detection.
If you look around at the objects in the room,
often you define them by their edges.
So we have this elaborated neural mechanism
involving inhibition and excitation
that allows for this type of contrast enhancement.
And what can we do with this even more?
So these guys Hubel and Wiesel decided
that they were going to look-- OK, another brief anecdote.
So there's this commercial when I was young.
And it was Michelin Tires.
And if any of you guys ever become marketing people,
which there's enough of you that statistically, someone will.
I don't know why you don't make commercials
that are scary, because this commercial frightened me.
And I was, like, six.
And I remember it to this day.
So why not, if you want someone to remember your product,
just make it-- take what you know from this,
and use it to manipulate people.
That's what education is.
And so I remember this commercial.
And I just remember it was for Michelin Tires.
And their whole point was that no matter how fancy
your car is, no matter how much you spend on your car,
there's only four points of contact
between you and the road.
And it's on your tires.
And I don't know why, but this blew my mind, and it scared me.
And it made me recognize that, yeah, you
should get good tires.
So Hubel and Wiesel, they took essentially the same logic,
which is that we have this complicated visual world,
and we know that we put it together somehow,
but our only access to this information
is through the retina.
We have the light is the road.
These are our two tires.
We only have two tires to connect with the road.
And so their logic was that if we
look at each individual neuron in the retina
and trace it back, we should be able to see, somehow,
how this visual world is constructed,
how it is that we go from the only signal, the only signal
from the outside world we get, to
this complicated visual field.
And what they found was that if you
look at the neurons in the back of a retina,
and then look at where they synapse, back
in your visual cortex, they found
a one-to-one correspondence, that if you activate
a certain neuron in your retina, you'll
get a spatiotopic-- which means they're oriented
in the same way, and all the neurons
are aligned in a similar way-- field
in the back of your visual cortex, in V1.
And so what that essentially means
is that your eyes are smushed to the back your head.
There's no information that necessarily gets enhanced
or reduced between your retina and the back
of your visual field.
And they're like, OK, great.
And so these guys, Hubel and Wiesel, won the Nobel Prize.
If you could win more than one, they probably
would have won four by now.
They were these Harvard neuroscientist back in the day.
And they are pretty much who you need to know.
You need to know Hebb.
You need to understand glutamate.
You need to understand LTP.
And Hubel and Wiesel, if you're going to be a neuroscientist,
be interested in the brain, they will come up.
And if you're a neuroscientist, you
have to invite them to your wedding.
You have to do everything.
I don't even know if they're-- they might even be dead.
You have to seance them, or something.
But what they decided to do was then, OK, now we're at V1.
We're at the one level of visual cortex.
What else can we do?
Where does the scene get constructed that we see?
And what they did was looked one layer up.
And they did the exact same thing.
They fired individual retinal neurons.
And they looked in the next layer up.
And absolutely nothing happened.
There was no activity anywhere, no matter what they did.
It fired all of them, and there was no activity.
And they were like, oh, damn it.
We're not going to get invited to any weddings.
What are we going to do?
But what they discovered was that if you activated
enough retinal neurons, and that they
were in a certain spatial orientation, say a line,
then you get activation in this other layer
of your visual cortex.
And what they discovered, and what was on, I'm sure,
the construction of all of their wedding invitations,
was that if you have certain neurons that
are selective to certain orientations of lines, like so,
if you imagine these are four neurons,
a single neuron will be responsive to a vertical line.
A single neuron, another one, a different one,
will be responsive to a 45-degree angle,
a horizontal line, 135 degrees.
And so what you get, and you're starting to piece together,
is this way of constructing the visual world that is layered,
and that extracts out features, and that through those features
you get individual neural activation.
And you might imagine that if you go up even further,
you would get some sort of more higher order
types of activation, individual activation,
in your visual cortex, something like, say, a neuron that only
responds to an orange, or a neuron that only responds
to a banana, or a neuron that-- so this
is one of the terms in the field--
only responds to your grandmother.
And they call it a grandmother neuron.
And there's this kind of El Dorado type
quest for grandmother neuron.
Where can we find it?
And the problem is, nobody ever found it.
So then the question becomes, again,
related to memory, related to even our understanding
of these kind of networks of neurons.
Where are these memories stored?
This is slightly out of order.
But basically, this is an example of, again,
your lateral inhibition.
So to understand how it is that these signals are sharpened,
this is a nice visual illusion.
Do you guys see little dots of dark between each of those?
That is an artifact.
That is an artifact of your visual perception.
That is an artifact of you constructing that.
And why is that happening?
Because at each of those individual corners,
you're getting the most amount, because
of the four axial bars of white, of lateral inhibition.
So in every single one of your brains right now,
whenever you look at the individual corner,
you're getting lateral inhibition.
And so you can imagine that this type of thing
is a demonstration of lateral inhibition.
Another type of thing, when I was talking about pain,
there's this fascinating thing where-- we all
know this-- where if something itches, say,
you have a mosquito bite.
And you want to scratch the hell out of it,
because sometimes it feels really good.
You notice also that you can scratch around it.
You can make hard, kind of painful stimuli
in the immediate vicinity, and just
do it really, really hard enough.
And you get lessening of pain.
And what that is, is the same type of thing.
It's lateral inhibition of the focal point of the mosquito
bite.
And so these things sound abstract,
but these things really are real.
And we can see them, and we can feel them,
if we know where to look.
So one last idea.
We're trying to get at, OK, where
are these memories stored?
Where are these facts?
Where is what you know now about neurobiology stored?
And it's helpful to introduce the idea of neural networks.
There's 100 billion neurons in the brain.
These are not communicating one to one.
These are communicating with tens of thousands
of other types of neurons.
And if you simplify this down to just the basic idea
of a neural network, such that you
have your bottom, first layer cells.
And these first layer cells respond to, respectively, left
to right, Monet, Cezanne, Degas.
They just respond.
For some reason, they have been tuned.
They have undergone LTP.
That is what they respond to in this very one-to-one Hubel
and Wiesel kind of way.
But what we notice is that there's this elaborate property
you get when you start to combine neurons
with many, many other types of neurons, which
is that you get a network.
And you get a network without one-to-one correspondence.
So if you look at the top row, and you get neurons A
through E, A still responds in this one-to-one way,
with just Monet.
E, again, you got just Degas.
So those are not really informative in the way
in which we want to understand the emergent property,
and what's important about neural networks.
What we get out of neural networks
is emphasized when we focus on C. Neuron
C doesn't know-- if it gets activated, what can you tell?
You don't know which input it came from.
You don't know whether it came from the first-layer neuron
1, first-layer neuron 2, or 3.
You don't know whether or not it was a Monet, Cezanne, or Degas.
All you know is that it's one of those three.
And what you get now is this idea
that you can have concepts, and you can have categories.
And you can have a category of impressionism.
That doesn't necessarily give you
information about individual types or names, or which
neuron it came from.
But you have a network of neurons
with different concepts in it.
And amidst this network, you can now
understand how it is that environment and context can
impinge on the storage and retrieval of facts.
So the idea that emotionally salient memories are longer
lived in your brain, in your synapses, in your plasticity,
than other ones, well, how is that true
if they're not contextually related, if the mechanism is
the same everywhere?
But what you begin to see is that if you combine context
in this version of neural networks,
you start to get the neural representation of context,
the neural representation of environment.
And this makes sense if you think about how
we try to remember things.
If you try to remember something,
and you know it's an impressionist painter,
or you know it's within a category,
but you're not quite there, you kind of
take a tour of categorical ways of thinking
and categorical learning and categorical objects
in the world to try to get at how that one fact,
that one bit of information that you're trying to remember.
So it's not that individual memories are stored in neurons.
It's not that they're stored in the generation of synapses.
It's not that they are stored in entirely just the plasticity
of single synapses.
It seems that we can get at and explain
a lot of these types of memory by understanding
that memory is one aspect of the formation
of these neural networks, and that if we have
100 billion neurons, we can imagine
elaborate and complex ways of designing these things.
So here we go, one more time.
Many very different things happen
when we remember, everything down
from the synaptic plasticity all the way up
to this impressionism, categorical way of thinking
and remembering about things.
And what is again interesting here
is that you can imagine-- what we've
learned about polymorphisms, genetic individuality
and variation, that certain people can have
different stress responses.
The person next to you can have a different response
to stress than the other person.
One person will be more afraid of public speaking
than the other person.
One person will respond a certain way
based on prenatal, postnatal environment,
all these different things, all these different variations,
these polymorphisms that lead to individual and varied behavior.
And now we can understand that a polymorphism in how much
presynaptic glutamate gets released-- remember,
glutamate, excitatory-- a polymorphism
in how strongly your postsynaptic receptor responds,
a polymorphism in the ways in which your neural networks are
constructed, these types of individual things,
which each are their own variable in your brain's
construct of memory, can lead to different and individual ways
in which we remember.
Some people are just better at remembering than others.
And what we're trying to get at is from the spectrum of HM,
who can't remember anything, to Stephen Wiltshire, who
can remember this, and where the genetics and the environment
impact our individual memory.
And I think that's it.
So we'll take a five minute break.
[APPLAUSE]
I'm going to talk to you guys about the autonomic nervous
system.
So basically, autonomic sounds like automatic.
This is anything that's going to happen automatically
in your body, not quite the hippocampus, horse,
like hippodrome-- like automatic, autonomic.
So basically, your heart beating, digesting,
goosebumps, orgasm, things that you don't have control over--
[LAUGHTER]
Good stuff, right?
This is going to be your autonomic nervous system.
So first, the nervous system, remember,
is split up into the central and the peripheral.
So our central nervous system is our brain and our spinal cord.
And our peripheral nervous system
is everything else on the periphery.
And then within that, the peripheral nervous system
can be split up into the somatic nervous system
and the autonomic.
So we're going over the autonomic.
Remember that.
But just to tell you about the somatic,
that's basically the voluntary nervous system.
So if you want to pick up a pen off the ground,
your brain says, OK, I want to pick up a pen.
Send the message to my muscle.
Muscle's going to pick up the pan.
It's also your sensory info, so when
you touch something or smell something, information
from the periphery going to your central nervous system.
And autonomic nervous system, what
we're going to talk about today, can
be split up into the parasympathetic and sympathetic
nervous systems.
We'll go over all those in detail.
But for right now, one last comparison
of the voluntary and autonomic.
So the voluntary nervous system, remember, voluntary,
moves muscles.
Autonomic, it's involuntary, moving organs, your heart,
your digestive system, your lungs.
The voluntary nervous system's actually myelinated.
So what that means is there's a myelin sheath covering
the axon, as you can see there.
And the action potential actually
can speed up and go down the axon faster.
And the autonomic nervous system's actually unmyelinated.
These are just fun facts.
So it goes a little bit slower.
The good stuff, autonomic nervous system--
so we have sympathetic and parasympathetic.
And sympathetic is that nervous system
where you hear fight or flight.
So anything exciting, arousal, alertness, emergency,
like if you have a hippo chasing after you
or something, definitely sympathetic nervous system.
If you like somebody and are talking to them first time,
sympathetic nervous system activation, you're excited.
Parasympathetic is more of the calm, vegetative function.
So after you have a huge meal, or when you want to take a nap,
anything like that, growth, repair, total relaxation state.
And as you can see, they kind of sound
like they have opposing functions, because they do.
And they tend to work in opposition,
so it's kind of like putting your foot on the gas
and the brake at the same time.
You can't really do that, because they're opposing.
When the parasympathetic system is on,
your sympathetic nervous system is usually off, and vice versa.
So they work together to keep our body going automatically.
OK, sympathetic nervous system-- so remember,
this is like that huge animal, whatever your favorite one is,
chasing after you.
What do you do?
Well, your heart speeds up.
It's going to beat faster.
You're going to breathe more.
You're going to vasoconstrict.
So what that means is you're sending the blood-- you're
basically constricting your blood vessels
and sending blood more to your lungs and to your muscles,
so you can run away.
You're going to inhibit digestion.
When you're running away from a hippo,
you don't care about digesting the sandwich you just had.
You're going to sweat.
Your muscles will tense, anything
you would think of when you're just totally freaked out.
And the parasympathetic nervous system-- I
really like these pictures.
I found the dog, and I got super excited.
And then I found him, and I wanted to name him,
but I haven't thought of it yet.
But basically, they're resting and digesting.
They're just taking it easy, like growth, repair.
Basically anything you would do when you're not stressed,
you have time to do now.
Your immune system can function well.
You can spend time digesting and urinating.
Sympathetic nervous system-- So we're
going to look into the neurotransmitters involved
in both the symptoms now.
So neurons-- what's being communicated?
And I know that Pat told you glutamate's the best.
But I'm going to fight that and tell you that norepinephrine
is one of the good ones, too.
So basically, you release norepinephrine
in the target organs when you're dealing
with the sympathetic nervous system.
So the hippo coming at you, what you do
is you're going to release norepinephrine,
NE, onto the target organs.
And you can see the organs on the right.
It affects all of those.
So it's going to your heart.
It's going to your lungs.
It's going to your kidney, your bladder.
And it's telling it-- when it receives norepinephrine,
those organs know, OK, my sympathetic nervous system
is activated.
I'm going to fight or flight.
I'm going to run away right now.
Or I'm going to start-- my heart's going to beat faster.
And the one exception is the sympathetic nervous system
actually releases epinephrine in the adrenal.
And this is just a cool exception.
Epinephrine, remember it's one step away from norepinephrine
in the biosynthetic pathway.
So you can make epinephrine from norepinephrine,
so they're not really that different.
And epinephrine's also called adrenaline-- adrenal,
adrenaline, see the resemblance.
And this is just another diagram, again,
showing you norepinephrine released on the target organ.
So you think of sympathetic, you think of norepinephrine.
And you can see how it will go and accelerate the heart
beat, stuff like that.
And just more in detail, if you've
taken bio core-- I don't know about [INAUDIBLE] bio core,
but definitely bio core-- you know that it's not that simple.
You don't need to worry about this.
But there's actually an intermediate step,
where the spinal cord projections actually
first go to this ganglion, which then goes to the target organ
and releases NE there.
But don't worry about that.
Just know norepinephrine, sympathetic.
Parasympathetic nervous system-- so we
have another cool neurotransmitter
besides glutamate and NE, which is acetylcholine, or ACh.
And the parasympathetic, you see it goes to all the same organs.
But now, when it releases ACh, those organs
know parasympathetic, rest and digest.
I have time to finish my meal and do everything that I
can do when I want to relax.
And again, there is an intermediate step,
where you release acetylcholine first in the target organ.
And then a second neuron goes, releases acetylcholine again.
This [INAUDIBLE] Ach, parasympathetic.
And if you want more details about it,
too, this slide is totally extra details.
But you can see the projections from the spinal cord
actually lead from different places
in the parasympathetic and the sympathetic nervous system.
And you can just see at the end, acetylcholine
and norepinephrine being released.
So this is a really important slide.
That's why I put stars on it.
[LAUGHTER]
Even Sapolsky, when he saw my PowerPoint,
he was like, spend a lot of time on that slide.
So I'm going to.
So we're going to look at exactly what happens when
your parasympathetic or sympathetic nervous systems
are activated, and compare them in different organs.
So the easiest one to start with is your cardiovascular system,
so your heart.
You're running away, you're scared,
or you're meeting someone new for the first time
that you really like.
And your sympathetic nervous system turns on.
Your heart's going to beat faster.
Remember that.
So your heart actually has a myogenic rhythm,
which means it actually has a muscle that
is controlling its beating.
But what the brain does, and the sympathetic and parasympathetic
nervous system does, is it can change
how fast the heart beats.
So your heart's beating faster.
Your blood pressure will increase
when your sympathetic nervous system is on.
You're going to vasoconstrict, remember, send
the blood to your muscles, so you can run away and all
that good stuff.
And parasympathetic-- opposite.
Slower heart beat, vasodilation of the vessels.
Blood's now going to the GI tract for digestion,
and everything like that.
Another fun example is the GI tract itself,
so your gut, your stomach, your small intestine.
So basically, parasympathetic activity, when you're resting,
you have time to digest.
So what you do is you stimulate the secretion
of the acids and enzymes needed for digestion.
You move your small intestine with a contraction
called peristalsis.
And basically, you can go to the bathroom, and everything
that you would do while you're relaxing.
Sorry.
So in the heart and the GI tract,
you can pretty much see that they're working in opposition.
So when the heart beats up with sympathetic,
it slows down with parasympathetic.
GI, the opposite case, parasympathetic turns it on,
speeds up digestion.
Parasympathetic turns it off.
I'm sorry.
This is the important slide.
So one place where they actually do work together
instead of actually opposing each other
is in the male reproductive system.
And they work together for you to erect and ejaculate.
So what happens is in order to have an erection,
you have to be stress free.
You can't be worrying about your test.
So which one do you think is in charge of erection,
parasympathetic or sympathetic?
Parasympathetic.
Perfect.
So parasympathetic activation, you get an erection.
Now let's say you have an erection.
And now you're with somebody, maybe.
I don't know what you're doing.
[LAUGHTER]
Whatever's happening-- sorry.
All of a sudden, you feel your heart beating faster.
You start sweating a little bit.
Your sympathetic nervous system is turned on a little bit now.
So now we have parasympathetic, we still have our erection.
But we also have some sympathetic activity,
and then more and more sympathetic activity.
And all of a sudden, sympathetic activity completely takes over.
And what happens?
You ejaculate, right?
So parasympathetic-- erection, sympathetic-- ejaculation.
And it's actually a cool fact about erectile dysfunction
that about 60% of the cases are due to stress and not actually
organic basis in your body.
So if you're stressed out all of the time,
your parasympathetic activity won't turn on,
so you can't have an erection.
And also, we can explain premature ejaculation,
if you want to to your friends tonight.
You can just be like, well, let's think about it.
So I have an erection, but I'm going to ejaculate too soon.
So parasympathetic transition to sympathetic transition,
or the parasympathetic transition to sympathetic,
happens too quickly, your premature ejaculation.
[LAUGHTER]
And then health, so immune system.
[LAUGHTER]
When your parasympathetic system is on,
you can take care of your immune system.
You have the time to make the white blood cells.
But when you're chasing away from a predator or an elephant,
you really don't care about making new white blood cells.
And this could also explain why it's easier to get sick
when you're stressed out.
Your sympathetic is too much caring
about your stressful situation than taking
care of your immune system.
I don't know-- oh my computer goes on sleep.
I think that's it.
So again, we see there's a balance between the two
branches.
So sympathetic, you're running away from a snake.
When that's on, parasympathetic's
off, and vice versa.
And there's actually a really cute video that I found.
And you have to click it twice.
So the sympathetic nervous system, this video
will tell you everything that I just told you.
It increases heart rate, makes your pupils
dilate so you can see further, run away from the predator.
You don't have time to digest.
You don't care about nasal secretions right now.
[LAUGHTER]
You're not going to produce saliva.
Who cares about eating?
Inhibits the liver, kidneys, and gall bladder,
and stimulates sweating.
We're going to sweat when we're running away, getting scared.
Causes piloerection, so when your hair
stands when you're nervous.
Makes the lungs dilate, you can breathe faster.
Increases muscle strength so you can run away,
and is important for orgasm.
[LAUGHTER]
Sorry.
Parasympathetic, opposite, so it makes your heart rate go down.
Pupils are going to contract.
You're going to digest.
You're going to like the nasal secretions now.
[LAUGHTER]
You're going to stimulate the liver, the bladder,
and the kidneys.
You constrict your lungs.
You're going to pay more attention to your digestion.
And it's important for sexual arousal, remember erections.
You can play it again later.
So an important point to make is when
we think about sympathetic nervous system,
we're thinking about arousal, emergency, fight or flight.
But that doesn't mean it always goes to the organ
and excites it.
So in the heart, when norepinephrine
goes from the sympathetic nervous system to the heart,
it does excite the heart and make it beat faster.
But when it goes to the GI tract,
it inhibits GI tract activity.
So it's not always excitatory, it's not always inhibitory.
It depends on the organ.
Same with parasympathetic.
We think of it as being the slower moving one.
But in the GI tract, it does excite it.
In the heart, it inhibits.
So what does that mean?
It means we need two different receptors on our organs
that respond to norepinephrine or acetylcholine.
So on the heart, for instance, for norepinephrine, you'll
have an excitatory norepinephrine receptor,
because it will get excited and make the heart beat faster.
But in the GI tract, you'll have an inhibitory norepinephrine
receptor that will respond to the sympathetic nervous system
and slow it down.
And then for the parasympathetic,
you'd have an excitatory ACh receptor on your GI tract
to speed it up, to digest more food.
And you'll have an inhibitory ACh receptor
on the heart to slow it down.
So just see you can't always have
the same receptor on the same organ,
or else it wouldn't respond right.
And this is just showing you, again.
So the heart there, you have your inhibitory ACh receptor,
which tells your heart to slow down.
Excitatory norepinephrine, heart speeds up.
And in the GI tract, if ACh is coming your way,
it will attach to the excitatory receptor,
and it'll be like, digest.
And you have the inhibitory norepinephrine receptor there,
too.
So if sympathetic activity is being stimulated,
norepinephrine will land there and will slow down digestion.
So if you've taken bio core, if you want to know more--
there's actually names for all of these forms of receptors
that I put there, just in case you're extra interested.
But on the heart, I think the coolest fact about it
is the beta blocker.
So the form of the receptor on the heart that
responds to the sympathetic nervous system
is actually called a beta receptor.
And what beta blockers do, they block the receptor,
the beta receptor.
So this is why beta blockers are used
for slowing down heart rate, reducing hypertension.
It's basically blocking the effects
of the sympathetic nervous system.
And Pat actually just told me, which is great,
that the one drug that's banned from the Olympics
are actually beta blockers, because if you think about it,
a huge advantage would be to be less stressed.
So if they're blocking the receptor
on your heart that responds to stress
and the sympathetic nervous system,
you can see how it could allow you to relax more.
So it's a fun fact.
So now we're going to talk about the regulation
of the autonomic nervous system, so what's
happening in the brain that's resulting in norepinephrine
or acetylcholine being released.
And the center of regulation is now the hypothalamus.
So we just talked about the hippocampus,
so this is a different area of the brain, the hypothalamus.
It's going to be very important on Monday as well,
when Tom and Will talk about the endocrine system,
because the hypothalamus directly
affects the pituitary gland, which is center
of your endocrine system.
So basically, the hypothalamus here contains the cell bodies,
or is just one synapse away from all the cell bodies
that project onto the target organs,
from the spinal cord to the target organs.
So basically, the hypothalamus will tell the spinal cord
what to project onto the organ.
So an example of this would be in your heart.
And this is actually called the baroreflex.
And this is just an example of how your hypothalamus is going
to help your body maintain status quo,
so make sure that your blood pressure's never too high,
your heart's beating at a normal speed.
So let's say you're hemorrhaging,
because I don't know, a hyena just attacked you.
That's weird.
So anyways, you're hemorrhaging.
And you're losing a lot of blood,
so your blood pressure's going to go way down.
And you have these receptors in your blood vessels
that are called baroreceptors.
And they'll say, OK, blood pressure's way too low.
What do I do?
They're going to send that info to the hypothalamus--
remember the hypothalamus, center of regulation.
And the hypothalamus will be in charge
of sending that information along
to the spinal cord, which will then project onto the heart
and tell it to beat faster.
Sympathetic nervous system will be activated.
Beat faster, increase my blood pressure,
so that you'll make up for the loss of blood
that you just had.
And the opposite would happen if your blood pressure is
getting too high or something.
Maybe the info will be sent to your brain.
And then you can decrease blood pressure
through the parasympathetic nervous system.
So reptiles, everybody kind of has that hypothalamus control
of the-- yeah.
Sorry, I had a question about the [INAUDIBLE].
This is kind of a [INAUDIBLE] question,
but is it actually stimulating the sympathetic nervous system?
Or is it normally stimulating the parasympathetic and then
stops the stimulation?
Oh, because remember, one's on or off.
So like which one's normally on?
Do you guys know?
Anybody know?
There's just a baseline balance [INAUDIBLE].
Yeah.
So what about mammals?
Mammals have emotions.
And we have an emotional regulation
are in our brain that's called the limbic system.
And we're going to learn a whole lecture just
about the limbic system in general.
But basically, it has everything do with emotions, behaviors,
memories, all mammalian type things.
So now we see this realm where not just losing all your blood
can activate or stimulate the nervous system
and cause a parasympathetic or sympathetic response.
But now just seeing someone you hate
can cause a sympathetic response that's
very similar to losing a lot of blood.
And this is pretty amazing.
Wildebeests, for instance, if they see their enemies,
the info will be sent from just the smell of their enemies
to the limbic system, project onto the hypothalamus, spinal
cord, to the sympathetic nervous system,
be like, I don't like you response.
The sympathetic nervous system wanting
to either fight or flight.
And then in the realm of primates,
we also have our cortex.
And what the cortex does is it makes thoughts and memories
really important.
So now, instead of just having-- losing a lot of blood,
we're changing how our body functions.
And now, not even having to sense-- we
don't need to have a sense.
We can just think about a thought.
And that can go ahead and change the way
that every organ in our body functions,
which is pretty amazing.
So when you're thinking about a test, for instance,
you're going to activate your cortex.
And this will activate your limbic system, and then
your hypothalamus.
So that's known, actually, as the triune system of the brain.
You have the cortex in primates, mostly.
Then you have the limbic system, mostly mammalian.
And then you have the hypothalamus.
So it's going to go to each one of these layers of the brain.
And just thinking about a test can
cause a sympathetic response, where
you start sweating, getting nervous, stressed out.
And it's pretty amazing that if you lost a lot of blood
in a reptile, we can stimulate the same response just
thinking about something, or thinking
about someone on the other side of the world dying.
It's just amazing what primates can do.
And an interesting example of this-- and I
think we're having a lecture on depression, so I don't
want to give it all away yet.
But if you think about it, the symptoms
of depression, loss of pleasure, pain pathways on,
don't want to have sex, aren't in the mood
to eat, you're exhausted all the time, a lot of these symptoms
are the same symptoms you would see
if your sympathetic nervous system was overly activated.
And we can see how the cortex having bad thoughts
can go and activate that system in the same way, links
to depression.
And the last thing I wanted to talk
about in terms of the autonomic nervous system
was the plasticity of it.
So we just learned the plasticity in neurons,
in the synapses.
So that's when it can change over time.
And the autonomic nervous system can actually change over time,
in terms of how receptive, or when it turns on and off.
And a molecular example of this is
if you're a very stressful person,
and you're stressing all the time.
Well, then you need a lot of norepinephrine.
What do you do if you're stressing all the time?
You increase the synthesis of the enzyme
called tyrosine hydroxylase, I believe.
Yeah, it's up there.
And basically, this is the rate limiting step
in making norepinephrine.
So if you increase more of the enzyme,
you increase more of the norepinephrine,
you can sustain the stress response.
Another example, cellular example,
is that we have projections from the sympathetic nervous system
to the skin, eyes, nose, everything
that's going on out there.
And let's say we see something scary.
We can make those receptors more sensitive to that scary thing.
So we can say, hey, it actually smells that enemy.
We can make it seem scarier.
The sympathetic nervous system can turn on faster,
so sensitization.
There's also the opposite end of the spectrum,
where you habituate to things that are going on outside.
So scary stimuli-- if you see a spider
in your room the first time, you're
probably going to freak out when you're younger.
Lots of sympathetic activity, running away, fight or flight.
You decide to fly, because I don't like spiders.
But basically, after a while, second time you see a spider,
you're just like, oh, this is still scary.
Maybe I'll run away.
The third time, maybe you decide,
whatever, I'm just going to leave it there at this point.
And you're habituated to it.
So you've made the thresholds of your sensory receptors,
they don't care as much.
They don't respond as much.
And a last example, when we're talking about cognitive thought
and the cortex and what that can do
to change our autonomic nervous system,
is an example of biofeedback and blood pressure.
So basically, if you have high blood pressure,
you can go into the doctor's office.
And you have two options.
You can take medicine, or you could try biofeedback.
And what they do is they tell you
to think of a pleasant thought.
So think of your favorite vacation,
or think of your favorite person,
or just think of the beach in general.
And what you'll see is that your blood pressure will actually
decrease with a certain thought.
And then the doctor will tell you to think
about that thought again.
Your blood pressure will decrease.
And thinking more and more about that thought,
helping your blood pressure decrease,
what you do is you potentiate, remember, you make stronger
the connection where a cortical thought can go ahead
and activate more parasympathetic tone,
have less sympathetic tone.
So we're potentiating that pathway
by which a thought can cause our blood pressure to decrease,
which is pretty cool.
So the take home points, if you want to just know
what to remember from this.
Know the broad difference between autonomic,
automatic, and the voluntary nervous system, what we
talked about at the beginning.
Understand the neurotransmitters involved in each,
and why you need two types of receptors,
the inhibitory and excitatory.
Know one or two examples of what the parasympathetic--
that's what PNS, by the way, means--
and sympathetic nervous system do to an organ.
So remember the heart, the digestive tract,
the male reproductive system.
And then know a broad overview of how the brain regulates
the autonomic nervous system, so hypothalamus, cortex,
and we have the limbic system.
On Monday, we're going over endocrinology.
So have a good.
 Can you hear me like this?
Is this better?
Yes.
Yes.
OK, great.
So yeah, so like Tom said, feel free at any point
to interrupt us with questions.
Just raise your hand if something's confusing,
stuff like that.
Also, just like with the other lectures,
feel free to email us after class.
Our emails are on CourseWare.
You can find us that way.
So today, we're gonna provide a little bit of background
context introducing sort of [INAUDIBLE] place
in the context of the other sort of buckets of this class,
or I guess sort of think about it generally.
We're gonna talk specifically then
about peptide and steroid hormones,
different types of hormones.
Then we're gonna see some specific interesting things
about them that you might want to know.
Then we're gonna talk about how the brain controls hormones.
So hormone release, and then eventually feeding back
to how hormones influence the brain.
Sort of this dual communication system that's pretty neat.
But we're gonna touch on all those things today.
So Tom's gonna start out with some background context.
OK.
So way back when, when life first arose, things was--
were inside single cells, right.
Individuals were single cells who
had to interact with their environment.
They had to get food, they had to get rid of waste,
they had to make sure they were in the right pH and temperature
so that they could do well for themselves.
And as a single cell, it seems like a simple enough task.
But as things got more complicated
and multicellular life arose, there
arose a really big, important issue
for life, which is how cells talk to each other.
Cellular communication, OK?
And you don't have to worry too much about,
like, the jargony words like paracrine.
But it's kind of worth thinking about.
There are four main ways that cells can talk to each other.
The first one being cell-cell contact,
where you actually have one cell physically touching
another cell.
And that seems pretty understandable.
It's got to be really, really short range.
And it's just gonna be this cell talking to another cell.
We've got paracrine, which is a little more short range.
And you guys have heard about neuronal and endocrine.
And I'm gonna try to put these examples of communication
in the context of us, as a giant, multicellular organism.
This class, right now, OK?
So who wants to be the pancreas?
No one wants to be the pancreas.
OK, we've got a pancreas right there.
Thank you very much.
No, we don't have to be specialized cells.
But the point is that a cell-cell contact
in our organism would be actually someone
physically handing you a note during class, OK?
You actually-- and it's just one to one, short and easy.
Not gonna-- not a lot of people are gonna know about that
signal.
Paracrine is more like kind of you
whispering to a bunch of neighbors, right.
A couple people can hear you.
It happens pretty quick.
But it's not widespread.
Neuronal is something that is really important to this class,
and it's something you've heard about already.
This is the equivalent of texting your friend
during class, OK?
I saw Bill Loundy texting someone earlier.
I was a little offended.
So if you could put your phone away, sir, that'd be great.
And the key to neuronal transmission
is that it's really about electrical movement, OK?
That's why it happens so fast, because I've
got neurons that span all the way from here
to through my spinal cord, or from all
the way from my spinal cord out to the tips of my fingers,
and that's just electrical transmission
via action potentials, which you've learned a lot about.
Now, granted, when one neuron talks to the next neuron,
it's kind of a relay.
It's got to use a neurotransmitter
to communicate that.
But you can really focus, for the purposes of this example,
on that fast electrical action potential thing.
And the fact that it's a lot more specific than what
we're about to see, which is endocrine, which is long-range.
It's all about chemical messengers
traveling through the bloodstream.
Hormones in the blood.
That's what endocrine signals are about.
This is a lot more like Steven sending you guys an email
to the entire class, but it takes a long time
to get there, right?
It's gonna take a little bit longer,
but it's gonna enable us as a class
to coordinate our behavior so we all show up
to the right place at the right time, wearing the right thing,
whatever.
OK.
So you guys get that.
Questions about those different mechanisms of communication?
OK.
So endocrine clearly the focus of today.
Things are traveling through the bloodstream.
It's gonna take a while to get there,
but it's gonna be-- allow us to coordinate
a lot of different things.
Now, what would we want to coordinate?
Two kind of really exciting things that we can coordinate.
One is these giant transformations
that occur during life.
Things like metamorphosis of-- good,
I see some mimicking back there.
That's very good.
I want everyone to do this with me right now.
Metamorphosis.
Good.
So basically, you want all the cells in that organism
to kind of change in coordination with each other.
Same thing for a couple other things
which I'm about to talk about.
That's in contrast to-- it doesn't
have to be an adult organism, it just
has to be a functioning organism who
is in a certain environment.
And in that environment, oh, crap,
I need to get all my cells on the same page,
because we've got to address this particular environmental
thing.
So I'll give you a couple examples.
One really great coordinated developmental transformation
was the transition from young Harry Potter
to Daniel Radcliffe, right.
He was in that weird horseplay thing, got a lot of publicity.
And you can see, like, a lot of his cells
had to change kind of all at the same time.
And you get the point.
Same thing, I've kind of mentioned these.
As opposed to a kind of coordinated response
into a specific environmental thing,
which might be a stressful situation.
We're gonna hear about that a little bit later.
You want to make sure all your organs and cells
are doing the right thing for stress
mode or sexual arousal mode, whatever it is.
And we're gonna hear a little bit more about that later.
So Will has the mic.
All right, so that's sort of the background context putting
that stuff into play for today.
So there's some very important things
that you have to know about hormones overall.
We wrote here peptide versus steroid.
There'd technically a third kind of hormone,
which is single amino acid [INAUDIBLE] hormones.
But we're basically gonna talk about the distinction
between peptide and steroid hormones
today, and sort of structural differences
and what that means in terms of their transport
in the bloodstream, the effect they have on target cells.
And then we'll see different things
about their duration and other cool things like that.
So the structure generally, as you can see here,
we put up a picture of insulin in peptide form.
We wanted to make it look like a protein.
Peptides, of course, and amino acids
being the precursors to proteins.
We see sort of here this is a typical peptide hormone made
from amino acid precursors.
And a key term associated with this
is the notion that it's hydrophilic.
So this idea that it's water-loving.
This plays into the sort of transport mechanisms involved
with it, and other things which we'll talk about in a moment.
So peptide hormones made from amino acids,
hydrophilic, water-loving.
We'll see some examples.
You've heard of some already.
Insulin, vasopressin, oxytocin, ACTH, CRH, and more.
And then we also have steroid hormones
So these are made from cholesterol precursors.
They're hydrophobic, water-hating.
Another term we associate with this is lipophilic,
liking of lipids.
When we talk about the cellular membrane being
made of a phospholipid bilayer, steroid hormones
are hydrophobic or lipophilic.
They're able to pass through this phospholipid bilayer.
Ends up being very important for their mechanism inside target
cells.
So some examples of this.
Classic example, glucocorticoids.
We're gonna see those all over the place.
We already had talked about them a bit.
Androgens, estrogen, things like that.
Something really interesting about the structure
of the hormones.
So if we take a steroid hormone-- OK,
so I'm not gonna draw [INAUDIBLE].
I'm gonna draw a single amino acid, which this actually
is nothing-- looks nothing like a single amino acid hormone.
But you sort of bear with me and pretend here.
So a lot of these hormones, steroid hormones,
single amino acid hormones, peptide hormones,
they come from similar precursors, right?
You have peptide hormones, it's amino acids.
And single amino acids, it's often from tyrosine,
and steroid hormones is from these cholesterol precursors.
Why is this interesting?
It's interesting because, when they
come from the same precursor, they
end up looking very similar.
So one might have this here.
So this might be one hormone.
And then we might have an identical-- a newly identical
one underneath.
But now it has just another sub-chemical shift.
Chemical structure doesn't really matter.
The point is that, if you're familiar with some organic
chemistry, you have just subtle chemical shifts leading
to different hormones.
Interestingly, from an evolutionary standpoint,
this suggests the need for basically
having receptors specialized for these subtle chemical
differences in the hormones.
norepinephrine and dopamine have just a slight difference
like this.
But the effect, if the receptor wasn't
able to distinguish those-- between those,
it would have a drastic effect.
So it's very important, from an evolutionary standpoint,
to have receptors that can distinguish
these subtle differences in the hormone chemical structure.
That sounded really technical.
Any questions on that sort of general idea?
Is that cool?
OK.
That does remind me of one thing that I
didn't make a distinction between when
I was talking about neuronal versus hormonal transport.
A lot of times, we will kind of throw out these words,
and there's a lot of jargony words.
Norepinephrine, blah, blah, blah.
And it's kind of good in your mind
to be able to separate between hormones, things that
are really these classic things that
travel through the blood as signals, and neurotransmitters.
Neurotransmitters being they're also chemicals,
and they also need to communicate cell to cell,
but they are gonna be just in that synapse, OK.
From one neuron to the next in the synapse
that you've already heard about.
And just to make your guys' lives awesome,
there can be overlap.
There can be neurons that release their neurotransmitter
into the blood, at which point they become hormones.
So things like dopamine and epinephrine, right.
Things you might associate with neurotransmitters
can also be hormones, depending on what context and all
that stuff.
So just something to really focus
your attention on when you're distinguishing these signals.
OK, cool, thanks.
So yeah, so we talked about the structure very briefly.
From that structure, we can talk about sort of the differences
in transport.
We talked hydrophobic versus hydrophilic.
The images-- should have done an animation-style pop-up.
So our peptide hormones are gonna be water-soluble.
They're gonna travel freely through the bloodstream.
We have-- I guess our example here is
people riding a roller coaster.
These monks are just riding free, looking good.
You can imagine the monks as sort
of examples of these peptide hormones traveling
freely, dissolved through the bloodstream.
Not really dissolved, but that's OK.
So peptide hormones traveling freely through the bloodstream.
Steroid hormones, however, they're
not water-soluble, so they need to be bound to a chaperone.
This is our example of a chaperone guiding this hormone
through the bloodstream.
So this is-- it's just sort of an interesting thing
to note about their transport.
We may talk about this a little later in other contexts.
Other interesting things we can learn from the structure.
So, interaction with the target cell.
When Thomas was talking about the context here,
it's really that we understand how hormones
interact with cells, right?
They require a specific receptor for each individual hormone.
We talked about the importance sort
of the specificity of that.
Peptide hormones and steroid hormones sort of
have generalized mechanisms that we're
gonna talk about, ways in which they
interact with target cells.
Peptide hormones on the left here.
So peptide hormones, because they can travel freely
through the bloodstream-- or I'm sorry, let me step back.
They can travel freely through the bloodstream because
of their structural properties.
However, those same structural properties,
the fact that they're hydrophilic,
prevents them from being able to travel
through the phospholipid bilayer of a cellular membrane.
So the receptors for peptide hormones
are on the surface of these cells.
They're surface receptor cellular membrane sort
of-- the receptors are on the cellular membrane.
Because of that, they're typically
associated with these what are called secondary messenger
responses.
The details of this-- I think a lot of you guys
have been exposed to this in all sorts of biology
or human biology.
But if you haven't, generally what happens
is a peptide hormone binds to a receptor of the cell membrane,
and then sets off what we always call this cascade response.
The secondary messenger cascade response.
This is actually really interesting.
It can lead to a number of different effects.
One thing it can do, which we'll talk
about when this is a neuron, is it
can activate ion channels, sort of helping
ion channels to open or close.
We'll talk about that in terms of membrane potential later on.
Another thing it can do-- and this is the classical example
with peptide hormones-- is it sets off
this secondary messenger cascade that
affects proteins within the cell, directly within the cell.
So we can think of peptide hormones
generally as having action on proteins within the cell.
And that's sort of the end effect
of the secondary messenger cascade.
They also technically can go into the nucleus
and affect transcription.
However, that we tend to associate more with steroids.
And we'll look at some of the complexities and complications
of this later on.
You'll hear about this.
But I would say generally, it's important to note
that we tend to associate peptide hormones
with these secondary messenger cascades affecting
the proteins existing within the cell at the moment.
The onset tends to be relatively quick,
and the duration is relatively short.
We're gonna talk about this in comparison to steroid hormones.
And we can see why the relative onset duration is different.
So because it's affecting proton--
or proteins that exist, it's-- we can say that the duration is
relatively short.
And as we said here, it may affect protein activity.
Steroid hormones, by contrast, they
travel through the blood on these chaperone protein
carriers.
And then when they get to a cell,
they're able to diffuse through the membrane
and actually bind to receptors located within the cell.
Classically, we talk about steroid hormones
passing through the membrane, binding to a receptor,
and then going directly to the nucleus
to affect transcription.
So this is sort of our classic example.
Main effect, transcription.
The onset, then, slower, and the duration longer.
It takes longer to start these transcriptional processes,
and it's lasting a lot longer.
We're changing the rate of synthesis of proteins,
rather than changing the proteins that currently exist.
OK.
As always, feel free to interrupt if anything
seems sort of confusing.
So those are sort of some of the generic examples.
We-- insulin would be a classic example of a peptide hormone.
Glucocorticoids is our steroids hormone.
We may-- we'll see this coming up again and again.
We may touch on this again today in the lecture.
Cool.
So just to recap-- does anyone have questions off the bat?
Yes?
For the steroid hormones, it's like a receptor floating
in the middle of a cell.
Like, would that be on the nuclear envelope, or is it,
like, on something else?
Great question.
So the question was, for the receptor
for this-- and this image, by the way,
courtesy of Professor Sapolsky.
Thank you, wherever you are.
So the receptor is located within-- the question
is where is that receptor located
for the steroid hormone.
Is it on the nuclear membrane, is it within the cell.
Classically, we're gonna talk about basically receptors being
located in the cytoplasm.
There are examples you'll see if you look-- even if you did
a Google images search, you might
find examples of steroid hormone coming in, binding a receptor,
floating in the cytoplasm that's then taken into the nucleus.
Basically, we associate the receptors
as somewhere within the cell.
Perhaps on the nuclear membrane, perhaps somewhere else
in the cytoplasm.
And the steroid hormones bind within there,
and sort of carry out effects from that.
And you could easily also imagine
there being a receptor protein that's
already sitting on the DNA just waiting to be activated.
And then when the steroid hormone travels the entire way
into the nucleus, that's when it hits the receptor.
So yeah, both work.
Other questions?
Yeah.
What are cholesterol made of?
What is cholesterol made of?
So cholesterol-- I have no clue what it's made of.
I know generally what its chemical structure looks like.
If you look at the steroid picture
from the other page, the chemical structure,
cholesterol precursors are sort of similar ring structures.
You can look it up.
I think-- it's an interesting question.
In my mind, what I tend to associate
as a relevant question, or something
that I'm trying to get across more
would be that the steroid hormones come
from cholesterol precursors.
And so I sort of consider that the baseline,
rather than trying to think about what cholesterol
is made from.
Interesting question.
Don't know off the top of my head.
And maybe the most important thing
would be that cholesterol is hydrophobic.
So if you're gonna make stuff from
this hydrophobic beginning, it's gonna be hydrophobic also.
And I just want to make sure people are completely-- those
are some really jargony terms.
Hydrophobic, hydrophilic.
There are a lot of synonyms for those terms
that are equally jargony, things like lipophilic and lipophobic.
Lipo means lipid, so something that is hydrophobic
is lipophilic.
That hurt anyone's brains?
OK.
So just kind of maybe spend some time
thinking about those words.
You can kind of logic through them pretty easily.
You might also hear people use the terms
polar versus non-polar.
Water is polar.
So water-loving things, hydrophilic things,
tend to be polar.
And hydrophobic things tend to be non-polar.
Don't worry too much about that vocabulary.
I just want you to know that there's
a lot of different words people might throw around
that all essentially are getting at the same thing.
Any other questions about this basic setup so far?
No?
All right.
Onto chapter two, which is how does the brain control
hormone release.
We've established that it'd be a good idea
to release hormones in response to certain environmental cues.
How can we control that?
And as this picture shows, there are many, many different sites
in our body where we can release hormones from.
We've got the pancreas right there.
We've got the testes.
We've got all these different glands.
These are just specialized structures
that can just pump this hormone into the bloodstream,
because that's what hormones are all about.
Some that will come up will definitely
be the testes, the ovaries for females.
I don't know why they're drawn on the same guy here.
Kind of interesting.
The pancreas, which is-- we keep talking about this thing
called insulin.
That's released from the pancreas,
and it's gonna have something to do with food and sugar
and things like that.
The thymus is another great little endocrine gland.
It releases thyroid-- no, thymus releases-- oh, thymus
is where-- what endocrine signal does the thymus release?
T-cells.
Thymus-- t-cells?
I'm not sure those are hormones, though.
So anyway, the thymus is involved in the immune system.
Let's ignore that for now.
And blah, blah, blah.
You guys get the point.
There are many places throughout our body that secrete hormones.
And they tend to secrete a certain signal.
Now very excitingly, you'll notice that the brain itself
has some endocrine glands in it.
The hypothalamus.
We've heard this word hypothalamus a few times.
The hypothalamus is an endocrine gland,
meaning it can secrete things into blood.
The pituitary, right next to the hypothalamus,
separated by a little blood maybe,
maybe not, the pituitary also can release hormones
into the blood.
And these other kind of lower-down peripheral endocrine
glands often are regulated by those big master endocrine
glands in the brain.
I don't know if you guys have been reading your zebras yet,
but I think Professor Sapolsky referred
to these as the brain is the master of these witless organs.
These guys are just kind of, like,
doing whatever the brain tells them to do.
And it's the brain controlling, via the hypothalamus
and the pituitary, is going to be
able to control how much testosterone is coming out
of those testes.
Does that make sense?
The brain controls these peripheral endocrine glands.
OK, so let's zoom in on that hypothalamus pituitary
situation.
Will really didn't want to include this picture,
but I thought it was hilarious, and I can't explain why.
Maybe it's the ponytail.
I'm not sure.
But we're just kind of focusing in
on these two different parts.
And you'll notice maybe that with-- something to take away
from this picture is simply that the brain is
kind of feeding into the hypothalamus, which
is feeding into the pituitary.
So when we see something, that information is processed
in our brain, can tell our hypothalamus oh crap, oh, crap,
it's stressful.
It can tell the pituitary.
And we get this-- eventually, we can tell the rest of our body
what to do via hormones.
Awesome.
Goodbye, ponytail lady.
OK.
Here's another just classic, classic Sapolsky image here
that we were able to borrow.
And this is zooming in, once again,
on just the hypothalamus.
And now we're really, really looking at the pituitary.
And this is where things are gonna
kind of hit the fan a little bit,
so I went everyone to put your A-game on, to mix a metaphor.
OK.
So the pituitary.
The pituitary are these two kind of things dangling
below the hypothalamus.
A lot of weird pictures of them.
This one's nice because it clearly
divides the anterior pituitary from the posterior pituitary.
And we're gonna make some really, really important
distinctions that hopefully you can grasp from this image.
And if you can't, let me know.
OK.
So first of all, the anterior pituitary secretes hormones.
It secretes these things over here.
I'll talk about them in a second.
The posterior pituitary secretes a different set of hormones,
these ones over here.
That's one distinction.
Another really interesting distinction
is how the hypothalamus regulates that secretion.
OK?
On the anterior side of things, the hypothalamus,
being an endocrine gland, can actually
drop some hormones into that little red river of blood
right there.
So the hypothalamus is actually releasing a hormone
into the blood, and that travels down to the posterior pituitary
and tells those-- sorry, the anterior pituitary, sorry--
and tells those cells to then release
another hormone into the blood.
And once they're in the blood, they
can go all the way down to those other target
organs we talked about.
So that's one system.
You've gotta actually travel through the blood
in the anterior pituitary.
The posterior pituitary is actually
directly innervated, OK?
So the hormones that are released by the posterior
pituitary are actually coming out of those neurons.
And the cell bodies of those neurons
are up in the hypothalamus.
So a couple examples.
Let's go through the examples.
You absolutely do not need to memorize this.
We only did this because Will teaches MCAT,
and those kids really like their acronyms.
They like things that you can say out and put around and put
them in bold.
So FLAT PEG is the acronym that people
use when they want to memorize a lot of stuff
to memorize the posterior-- or sorry, the anterior
pituitary hormones.
Some that will be relevant to us that you
might want to keep in mind are, particularly, ACTH.
Don't worry about it quite yet, but just kind of plug it
in your mind to something cool.
And a couple of these other ones might come up
as well, but whatever.
On the posterior side, we were upset
because there was no cool acronym--
is that the right word, acronym?
Yeah.
For the vassopressin and oxytocin.
And we decided that since these are the two hormones that
are always being shouted out in these vole studies,
we put some voles on there.
And we thought they were cute.
They've kind of got some Rudolph things going on with the noses.
So yeah, whenever you're hearing about vasopressin and oxytocin,
those are hormones that are released
from the neurons in-- that go from the hypothalamus
to the posterior pituitary.
Now, questions about any of that?
That's kind of some neuroanatomy.
You're probably not super excited and interested
in about that.
But it's useful to know.
It might come up a little bit.
So, questions?
Clarifications?
None at all.
Oh, there's one.
Oh.
Yes.
So I guess the neurotransmitters [INAUDIBLE]
or are they released [INAUDIBLE]?
Oh, my, that's a great question.
So I don't know how much we got into kind of--
Why don't you repeat the question.
Oh, sorry.
The question was the neurotransmitter slash hormones
like vasopressin and oxytocin that
are released in the posterior pituitary,
are those just kind of like sitting there waiting
to be released, or do those have to be manufactured and then
sent over there.
Is that the question?
Yeah.
Or, like, if they're released from the [INAUDIBLE].
Are they released when needed, or are they, like, created
and then sort of sit there--
OK, so yeah.
I would think about this based on your typical understanding
of a neuron, which just has a cell body, an axon, and then
the axon terminal, which is where it releases
neurotransmitter, right?
In that axon terminal where it releases neurotransmitter,
it's got vesicles.
It's basically got these giant balls full of neurotransmitter.
Same thing here.
You've got these giant balls full of oxytocin
and vasopressin just waiting to be released.
But aren't those made in the hypothalamus?
Those-- like any other neuron, those are synthesized,
produced in the cell body of that neuron, which
exists in the hypothalamus.
And if you're interested in how that works,
you've got to go on this crazy journey
where stuff-- proteins, whatever,
made in the cell body of that neuron, which you can see up
there-- has to be carried by these motor proteins
down the cytoskeleton.
They walk like this, I'm serious.
I'm not making this up.
And they have to walk all the way down the cytoskeleton
to get there so that they can just wait for the right signal.
That's an excellent question, also getting
at a deeper issue, which is what is it that
leads to this hormone release.
And we are gonna cover that in our chapter three coming up.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So yeah, clearly there are neurons
telling the hypothalamus neurons when
to be activated, when to release vasopressin.
Other questions about this slide that's-- is anyone totally
confused as to what it is even talking about?
Or you guys feel OK?
You feel OK.
All right.
One last thing on this one is I'd
like to contrast it to Dana's excellent talk
on the autonomic nervous system, where you guys learned
a lot about a lot of different things,
including the fact that the brain can control
the autonomic nervous system.
And the brain actually sends neurons with their cell bodies
in the hypothalamus and, instead of sending them
to the pituitary, it sends them some other route
down your spinal cord and out.
And when we were talking about the autonomic nervous system
and it being also controlled by the hypothalamus--
this is just kind of a reminder, OK?
The brain and the hypothalamus are really, really important
for regulating a lot of things.
In the case of endocrine systems, this is how it works.
Cool.
Awesome.
Now we're gonna look at just one example, kind of zoom back
out from the lady with the ponytail
to the dude with the ovaries and the testes
to remember kind of how all this works together.
And I could have done many different systems, right,
because we had all those different peripheral organ--
peripheral endocrine glands that needed to leak juice out
into the blood.
I chose this one because it comes up a lot in the class,
and it's often referred to.
So it'd be the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis.
The adrenal gland is one of those several glands.
It is regulated by whatever hormones
are in its environment.
And whether that hormone is there
is thanks to the pituitary and so forth.
There's this kind of cascade of events
that allow the brain to control a peripheral gland.
And in terms of exactly which hormones do that,
we see that the hypothalamus is gonna
have to leak some CRH into that portal vessel
that we saw for the anterior pituitary.
So those neurons on the upper left
would leak, leak, leak some CRH.
I might even choose not to tell you what CRH stands for.
And let's just say it's CRH.
And then CRH travels through that blood
until it gets to those neurons where it activates ACTH.
It activates neurons-- or sorry, not neurons,
it activates endocrine cells to secrete ACTH into the blood.
And then that travels through the entire body's bloodstream.
So it's gonna go all over the place.
But it just so happens that the cells
that really like to respond to ACTH are in the adrenal gland.
So the adrenal cortex, it's kind of chilling right
on top your kidneys, having a good time.
And when ACTH is present, it will release glucocorticoids.
And that's a big, scary word.
It's a very important word, because it's involved--
this is the stress hormones.
And for those of you guys who have started reading zebras,
you will have read a lot about glucocorticoids already.
They are gonna be a really important hormone
throughout the second half of the class.
So glucocorticoids, stress hormones.
One specific one that often gets referenced is called cortisol.
And we don't have to worry about it too much right now,
but just remember stress hormones are
getting pumped out.
So we kind of understand these first two positive arrows,
I hope.
Brain sends an arrow to the pituitary
sends an arrow to this via hormones.
Now when cortisol comes out and it
travels through the systemic blood circulation,
it's kind of knocking on all the doors of every single cell
in the body saying, like, yo, yo, yo, I'm cortisol,
I'm here to party.
And if that cell has a receptor--
this is a theme coming up-- then it will respond.
OK?
And some of the cells that have receptors for cortisol
are in the pituitary, and some are in the hypothalamus.
And what that allows for, it allows the pituitary
to know how much cortisol is in the system.
So when it kind of realizes oh my god, yay, the ACTH
made it there and cortisol came out,
now that I hear the cortisol is in the pituitary,
I'm gonna stop.
I'm going to slow down on the ACTH
and I'm gonna relax a little bit.
And that's something called negative feedback.
Negative feedback, big term in biology and all this stuff,
just means that the more cortisol
you get it to send out, the less ACTH.
It's kind of a balancing mechanism.
Brings us back to baseline so that we stop secreting
so much dang cortisol.
Same thing exists, there's a whole other area
for negative feedback, in the hypothalamus.
And I think that, in the more advanced endocrine lectures,
we'll learn about another site of negative feedback,
OK, other parts of the brain that, when they hear cortisol,
can slow this cascade down.
So any questions about negative feedback,
what is the HPA axis, why does it
represent everything we've been learning.
OK.
OK, great.
Thank you, Tom.
So Tom pointed out my least favorite slide
of the day earlier.
This happens to be my favorite slide.
This is one of those slides where
it looks like it's fairly simple,
but actually a lot of thought went into this,
so much so that we probably spent, like,
two hours with the original slide,
scrapped that, and then about an hour ago changed it to this.
So here it is.
Very important question.
Stemming from the things that Tom just talked about,
this hormone being released and feeding back to the brain,
we're gonna investigate that a lot more closely now.
We're gonna look at hormone action on the brain.
We're gonna talk a lot about the hormone and receptors
for hormones.
We mentioned very briefly earlier sort
of a generic cellular response to having a hormone bind
to your receptor, either on the surface or inside the cell.
Now we're gonna talk about specifically in the brain.
So we have hormone to the neuron, an epic journey.
The reason this slide took so much work is we
were trying to come up with the perfect analogy for a hormone
returning to the brain.
Something historically that had to go on an epic journey
to deliver a message where there were sort of proper receptors
to receive the message.
So we thought about sort of sticking with the Harry Potter
theme and going with Kingsley Shacklebolt's Patronus
to Bill and Fleur's wedding.
And Tom was a part of this.
But I decided that that didn't quite work.
We thought about Phidippides, the ancient Greek god who
went from Marathon to Athens to deliver the message that Greeks
had defeated the Persians, which was, like, the route--
or why the marathon is 26 miles.
Also didn't work.
So we stumbled upon this, which is
a picture of Paul Revere, the guy who supposedly
said the British are coming.
The reason this is such a good example-- well, or at least
we can stretch it to fit here-- is
that a hormone secreted from an endocrine gland--
let's say we're starting sort of from a target organ here.
And we-- Tom just mentioned cortisol
coming from this adrenal cortex and going back to the brain.
It has to travel sort of through-- a hormone
has to travel through the bloodstream.
Interestingly, in order for cortisol
to be secreted in the first place,
it received a signal, right.
In this case, from ACTH.
ACTH binding to receptors, stimulating the release
of cortisol.
Paul Revere was sitting out one night.
This is the guy back in 1775-- actually a week ago
today, and like 325 years ago or something like that.
1775, so that math is probably way off.
But you can figure it out.
He was sitting outside waiting to see these light beams.
He was waiting to receive a signal.
And we can think of Paul Revere as sort of a group of hormones
here.
And when the signal came in, these two light beacons,
he set off on this path through the bloodstream-- him
on horseback through the roads-- with this message.
And he didn't actually say the British are coming.
He said-- boy, what was it.
Something like the normals.
Something like that.
I may have written it down.
No, I didn't.
OK.
Well, he said some code word.
And basically, this code word, if there
were proper receptors for it, they knew how to respond.
So it wasn't just the British were coming,
it was some other word.
And if there were receptors for it, they could respond.
The relevance in this case is we're talking
about going back to the brain.
So Paul Revere was going to Lexington,
sort of the central hub, this central nervous system brain.
We can sort of stretch it that way.
And has to find the proper receptors there
to initiate this proper response.
So I don't know, I just like that analogy.
So what we're gonna talk about is hormone back to the neuron
has to get through the blood brain barrier.
Those are the neurons.
It's going through the neuron or the group of neurons.
Do they have the proper receptors
for this hormone signal.
And once it binds, how does it influence activity
in the brain.
What is going on there.
Questions so far?
Did I confuse significantly with that?
OK, cool.
So we're gonna move on.
Starting with the blood brain barrier.
So, the blood brain barrier.
On the left, we have this picture of just blood vessels
in the brain.
This is here because Tom sort of has a personal mission.
He and I both have been confused about what the blood brain
barrier is, what it looks like.
He used to envision-- you can tell them.
It's just really embarrassing, so I'd rather say it myself.
I used to think that, like, the brain was in this barrier that
protected it from, like, the evil blood supply, when
it obviously can't be like that because the blood has
to get inside the brain and tell every single cell
in the brain what to do.
And I'm confessing this to you today
that you actually have to picture the blood vessels'
access to the brain in a much more complicated way.
So the barrier itself is much more complicated, as well.
Right.
So the barrier is constructed by basically
these epithelial cells lining the blood vessels, right.
The blood vessels extend throughout the brain.
Just sort of an image of it there.
And we have this blood brain barrier
created by these tight junctions in epithelial cells.
Sort of a bunch of details that aren't necessarily
super important.
However, it's interesting because this barrier,
this blood brain barrier, basically tightly
regulates what type of things can go inside and outside
the bloodstream in the brain.
It's very important that we have a lot of control
over what's going on in terms of our blood supply in the brain.
So hormones, the question comes up,
can hormones pass through the blood brain barrier.
We did a bunch of research on this,
and basically because of their epithelial cells,
phospholipid bilayer, same story,
steroid hormones are lipophilic.
They can pass through this blood--
this phospholipid bilayer.
Not much of a problem there.
Peptide hormones, generally we know
that they can't pass through just on their own.
But we looked this up, there doesn't
seem to really be a problem with peptide hormones getting
to the places they need to get in the brain
because they have these carrier transports.
They have the ability to get through the blood brain barrier
when they need to.
So just sort of an interesting point there.
First step getting through blood brain barrier,
it's helpful to know it exists.
It might come up in other contexts later on.
Things like alcohol, alcohol can go right through the blood
brain barrier.
And that has certain effects on behavior.
We're gonna-- it might come up later on.
Here's this blood brain barrier, what
can get through it, what can't, what does that mean,
what are the implications for that in terms of behavior.
Something just to sort of know about generally.
So next step, receptors.
So hormones, when they're traveling back to the brain,
there have to be appropriate receptors for these hormones.
Tom talked about cortisol, an example of a glucocorticoid.
Glucocorticoid is a steroid hormone.
This is an image of a rat brain, and glucocorticoid receptors
in the rat brain.
We also have mineral corticoid receptors, which we're not
really gonna focus on, in blue.
An example would be, like, aldosterone for my MCAT,
you know what that is.
But we'll-- thanks for the nod, Nate.
But we're not gonna focus on that.
So glucocorticoid receptors.
As you can see, there are glucocorticoid receptors
throughout the rat brain.
Interestingly, however, we see them sort of
clumped in certain areas.
What's going on there?
This might suggest a particular area
that's particularly sensitive to these glucocorticoid hormones.
So these glucocorticoid hormones come
into the brain, diffuse through the membrane,
and bind to these receptors located in the brain.
We see here that one area is the hypothalamus.
Tom already mentioned one effect of what's
going on there, potentially sort of these negative feedback
mechanisms, right.
Glucocorticoids coming back and helping to regulate, or down
regulate the release-- maybe I shouldn't say down
regulate, but basically suppress the release of CHR
and, eventually, ACTH and other things affecting cortisols
released in the first place.
We also see these receptors clumped in the hippocampus
here.
So another interesting potential other type of negative feedback
thing going on there.
Stay tuned.
We may hear more about this later on.
Interesting point, though, is that for every single hormone,
we're gonna have unique receptors throughout the body.
But we're looking at the brain right now.
So we're gonna have unique receptors for these hormones
in the brain.
We're gonna want to be paying attention
to when we're looking at behaviors,
we're gonna want to look-- we're gonna want to think about,
basically, where are these receptors in the brain, what
types of receptors are they, that sort of thing.
On this slide, we wrote receptors
location, type, and how many.
So I briefly just talked about location,
the location of receptors, how that can matter.
Type of receptors.
You can have, within an individual,
you can have different types of dopamine receptors,
for example.
You can have multiple different types of receptors
for a particular hormone.
And this can lead to different effects,
depending on what type this is.
We also heard about this on sort of the population level, right.
A variation in the type of vasopressin receptor,
and how that can lead to sort of monogamous versus tournament
species type behavior.
I guess maybe stay tuned for this,
but we've also heard about these things before.
So types of receptors are interesting,
location of receptors.
How many receptors.
This is another question that becomes very important.
If we have a lot of receptors, we
can basically predict that there's
gonna be a higher sensitivity to the hormone in that area.
The low amount of receptors, not as sensitive.
When we look at sort of-- when we
talk about [INAUDIBLE] rats, epigenetic mechanisms,
this is supposed to be basically affecting
the expression of receptors in certain parts of the brain.
And then we can see the behavioral impacts of that.
So another thing briefly related to how many receptors we have.
We have the level of hormone, and we
have the level of receptor.
And both of these things basically
impact the behavioral output.
And the interesting effect we can begin to see happening
is that the level of hormone can affect
the up regulation or down regulation of receptors.
You might start out with a certain amount of receptors.
And then if you're flooded with tons and tons of hormone,
these receptors then might start to down regulate.
The cell might sort of down regulate
the amount of receptors expressed
on the surface of the cell, and you might see down regulation.
Conversely, we might see up regulation
if it's not receiving enough of this hormone.
Stay tuned for more of this, complexity of this,
complications with this, et cetera.
Any question so far on this stuff?
OK.
Cool.
So hormone action on the brain.
Next we turn to basically looking specifically
at a neuron.
As I mentioned before, we talked about sort of the effects
on cells.
We talked about peptide hormones and the secondary messenger
cascades.
We put the image back up, talked about steroid hormones
and generally affecting transcription.
Now we basically want to zoom in on a neuron
and see what types of effects could
be happening on these cells, these brain cells.
So we wrote down here, we summarized it very nicely,
potential effects of hormones on neurons.
Once the hormone binds to a receptor,
we can have it change the membrane potential
via ion channels.
So maybe secondary messenger cascade,
if basically some molecule of some sort
bumps into another channel, opens it more,
now you've changed the membrane potential in the cell.
It either becomes easier or more difficult to start an action
potential, something like that.
We can change transcription of genes.
So it can go in-- like we saw this with the steroid hormone,
going in and basically binding to DNA,
affecting transcription of genes.
In this case, the genes, they could be receptors.
This might be sort of the mechanism
for up regulation or down regulation
of receptors, something like that.
We can also have, of course, change in protein
activity in transport.
This, of course, is crucial, right?
Proteins could be involved with tons of things.
Neurotransmission, formation of new synapses,
the things listed there.
Basically, hormones can have impacts on all
of these different areas.
Protein activity, transcription, membrane potential,
all these different things.
And so at an individual cellular level,
we can begin to see sort of the wider array of impacts
on hormone binding, what that can do.
If you step back and think about this
as sort of networks of neurons, not just individual neurons
but networks of neurons, now you can
begin to see how hormones can start to shape behaviors more
overall, just these networks of neurons, these--
and those behavioral outputs being
sort of the output of these networks.
Yeah, question?
When you talk about impact on neurons,
do you mean cells that are in the brain
and the central nervous system, or are you
just talking about the brain?
Great.
So question-- actually, can you repeat that for me?
Are we talking the whole central nervous system, or just, like,
just the brain?
Whole central nervous system or just the brain?
Yeah.
So in this case, I'm talking about neurons
that are in the brain.
But these might project anywhere.
As Tom said earlier, neurons can project to other areas
within the brain, can project down
the spinal cord and elsewhere.
So the impact could be essentially anywhere
that these neurons could project when
we're talking about the effect of hormone input
on neurons in the brain.
The key is the neurons, where they project,
they'll have a certain impact on-- they'll
have some certain output wherever they project to.
But in the first place, they have
to have a receptor for this hormone to bind.
So it's just something interesting to note.
Other questions?
I saw a question.
OK.
Cool.
Good, thanks.
So I think that's-- kind of summarizes my thing on that.
Tom, did you have anything to add to that?
I'd say the more interesting things
that-- when we're talking about neurons changing activity,
neurons in the brain is where the interesting stuff is
happening.
Maybe the lower doses reflex has more of the, you know,
how hormones might influence how likely you
are to your little back arch raise, but who knows.
OK, cool.
So yeah, so we talked about in the nervous system
lectures how behavior is affected by the nervous system.
Now we've talked about how hormones
can affect the nervous system, and therefore sort of affect
behavior as an output there.
We're gonna do a little preview of some areas
we might see hormones interacting in future lectures.
So, stress.
We're definitely gonna see glucocorticoids associated
with stress response.
Here's Harry and Sirius, looking sort of stressed.
Sexual behavior.
Testosterone, estrogen, vasopressin, oxytocin.
We're gonna see these things as players in sexual behavior
lectures.
Aggression.
Testosterone again.
Glucocorticoids, estrogen, epinephrine.
Depression.
OK.
There's something about that picture.
All right, depression.
Glucocorticoids, thyroid hormone, estrogen,
progesterone, melatonin.
Great.
So some things [INAUDIBLE].
Just something to add for this slide
is we're kind of throwing a bunch of random hormones
at you that you might not be familiar with yet.
Something to think about is how every single thing
we've told you thus far regarding receptors and hormone
levels and room for individual variation and all these things,
levels, where they are, what type of receptors
might influence these things.
That's gonna be kind of how we walk
through a lot of these behaviors.
And then I think the last slide is just
take-home points, things that are really excellent for you
to try to walk away with.
So don't walk away if you don't understand
most of these things.
But steroid versus peptide hormones and the importance
of what it means to be hydrophobic.
Pretty much a lot of the consequences
for how we distinguish between these two things
depend on whether you're hydrophobic or hydrophilic,
so it makes it pretty easy to logic
through if you know that basic thing.
Whether you need the chaperone or not, and what-- how,
where your receptor is going to be.
The nervous system control of hormone release.
You guys-- I kind of hit that into the ground.
The HPA axis as one example of how the brain could control
peripheral or endocrine glands.
And then finally, when those hormones are released,
how can they influence behavior via neurons.
Kind of the long trials and tribulations of Paul Revere.
A really excellent analogy, I think.
I think you guys would all agree.
And yeah, basically that's it.
So if you guys have any questions,
you can shout them out, or just come down here and ask us,
because you guys have fun things to do today.
Thank you.
 Where have we got to now?
You guys have all the basics in hand
now for our next two buckets-- neurobiology and endocrinology.
What you have now, I hope, is a sense of especially the neuro
as the final common funnel out of which
comes all that behavior stuff we've been thinking
about-- genes-- whether they are changing in a static
and then punctuated way or a gradualist way.
What they code for we now know are proteins.
And in the realm of behavior, what that's all about,
you now know, are enzymes that make neurotransmitters, enzymes
that break them apart, receptors for neurotransmitters, the ion
channels that allow all the excitability stuff--
all of that should be a way of conceptualizing
what all that gene stuff that we've had so far funnels into.
Likewise with the endocrinology-- all those ways
in which reproductive status is going
to change how the brain works, all
of those great evolutionary models, blah, blah.
That's now endocrinology.
That's now the ability of hormones
to affect the nervous system.
And what came through, hopefully,
over and over for all of you in the lectures over the last week
are two themes-- lots of different ways
by which the nervous system and the endocrine system
can change its function over time.
And number two, lots of different realms
where there will be individual differences--
all the ways in which you will have
a brain and a bunch of glands that
are different than the person sitting next to you.
And what you should be able to piece apart readily by now
is where some of those individual differences
are coming from in the form of genetic influences,
where some of them are coming from environmental ones,
to begin to take some of those if/then clauses
back in the genetics lectures-- if it smells like a relative,
then cooperate with them-- to begin to imagine now
how the nervous system, how hormones would actually
translate that stuff into this next bucket.
So this will be our last bucket.
Today we'll be looking at all the ways
in which everything you heard in the last week
is vastly more complicated.
And on Friday what we will do is focus
in on the part of the nervous system that
is most pertinent to rest of the course.
Should you ever happen by some chance
to stumble into medical school somewhere down the line, when
they get around to the nervous system there,
you are going to hear about the spinal cord endlessly.
You're going to hear about the cerebellum.
You're going to hear about parts of the cortex.
You are going to hear next to nothing
about the part we'll be talking to on Friday.
And what it's about is emotion, and behavior,
and affect-- a part of the brain called the limbic system.
In medical school, they will pound into your head
over and over and over how the spinal cord moves
different motor systems.
Because that's 99% of what neurology
can concern itself with.
Because it at least has a fighting chance of doing
something therapeutic there.
This is the part of the brain that
is most defining to who we are-- personality, temperament,
all of that.
And it will be central to making sense
of all of this stuff coming in the second half of the course.
So it's going to be a very different domain
of the nervous system.
So what today is about is taking everything
you've learned over the last week,
and discovering that the ways in which it is tragically
distortive and not quite right, and comes with all of these
but wait-a-seconds and qualifiers, and all
the ways in which this first pass you had in the last week
sets you up now for appreciating an enormously more
complicated system than you've already seen,
one which generates, thus, vastly more possibilities
of communication, of information contained
within these neural pathways, one which generates
vastly more possibilities of individual differences
and of experience leaving its imprint,
one that generates vastly more possibilities for things
to go really wrong in the realms of abnormal behavior.
OK so a lot of what we'll be doing
is taking what you got in the last week
and seeing where, in fact, current research shows that it
is much, much more complicated.
OK, first version-- one of the rules that
runs through all of neurobiology--
you start learning the field and at some point,
they pull out the name of this guy Dale.
Dale who was the law giver.
Dale was some neurobiologist early
in the 20th century who generated two laws
that every single child was forced
to learn throughout the 1920s and 1930s
about how the nervous system worked.
Some time later than that, Dale's two laws--
and we will start off with one of them.
And it makes perfect sense until you see that, in fact, it
has no basis in reality.
Here is Dale's first law, which was you got your neuron--
and you should know by now we are dealing
with our schematic neuron.
And once we get into circuits in more detail,
we will give up the diamond shape on the neuron cell bodies
and switch over to circles, showing
just how fast evolution can be.
But we've got the neuron here.
And what we've got are the axon and the axon terminals.
And what Dale's law number two-- and of course, it's
irritating that we're doing number two before number one,
but tough-- what you've got here with Dale's law number
two is, each neuron has one characteristic type
of neurotransmitter-- one and only one.
And that's what it's releasing from all of its axon terminals.
And thus, you could categorize any given neuron
as this is one that releases serotonin.
This one is one that releases dopamine, et cetera, et cetera.
Notice that's a world of difference
as to what types of neurotransmitters
it has receptors for.
That's something else entirely.
That's what neurons over there it's listening to.
But any given neuron is releasing only one kind
of neurotransmitter.
So that one went down the tube during the '80s
with the discovery, in fact, that there
are multiple neurotransmitters released by neurons.
And this was boggling to people, and forced people
to give up on Dale number two.
And initially, this just seems like pointless complication.
What you wind up seeing is it puts
a lot more potential for information
into the whole business here.
OK, so here we have our archetypal synapse here,
going from left to right as always.
And we've got the one on the left here with its vesicles--
those little water balloons filled with neurotransmitter.
Along comes the action potential.
As a result, the vesicle moves to the cell membrane,
merges with it, dumps the neurotransmitter into there.
As you might guess, that actual process of exocytosis,
dumping the neurotransmitter, is vastly more complicated.
But this is our general model.
And what people began to realize was that all sorts of neurons,
all sorts of neurotransmitter types, in fact,
came with two different colors of neurotransmitters
in the vesicles-- came with two different kinds.
Notice this is different from in this axon terminal
you release this type of neurotransmitter.
And in this one, you release that type.
No, every single axon terminal would
contain both of these types of neurotransmitters.
And notice also, it would not be one vesicle
was a blue neurotransmitter vesicle and one was a red.
Each one of them had a mixture of the two types.
What has been found is that occurs in lots
of different types of neurons.
I believe the record is that there are now
some vesicles that contain three different types
of neurotransmitters.
So what we've got here are two different classes
of messengers coming out.
And what you should be able to immediately imagine
is, that's going to produce a lot more
potential for information.
Two different types of messengers-- one
of the characteristics that tends to be the pattern
is that when you get two neurotransmitters
in the same neuron, the same axon
terminal and the same vesicle, they
tend to be structurally very different sorts of classes
of neurotransmitters.
One might be a type made from a simple single amino acid.
Another one is somewhat of a complicated protein.
They tend to have fairly different structures.
And what that often tells you is,
they're going to have different mechanisms of action.
They're going to have different speeds of action.
What you wind up seeing is very often, when
two different types of neurotransmitters
are contained in the neuron, one of them
works much more rapidly than the other.
One has a rapid, short-term effect-- quickly decrementing.
The other will have a longer effect.
And by now, you can begin to imagine
what counts as a longer effect.
You change gene transcription in that neuron.
You change structural stuff happening,
as opposed to the short one, where just suddenly
some little ionic excitability change occurs
in a couple of milliseconds.
You begin to see this pattern of two different ways of coding--
coding for different types of information.
What we'll see shortly is one of the truly bizarre things that
pops up a lot with these cases of multiple neurotransmitters.
One of them will have receptors for it on the neuron itself.
And we will focus on that shortly.
That actually winds up making a fair amount of sense.
OK, so Dale trashed in terms of the notion
of any given neuron having only one neurotransmitter.
In some types of neurons you have, instead, pairs,
but following the same sort of rules.
And thanks to the typical structural difference
between the pairs of neurotransmitters,
you tend to get different sorts of functions.
You see a similar principle over at the endocrine end
of things-- a world of more than one single messenger carrying
the same message, or the same source of information
carrying multiple messengers.
Where we see here is what by now should be familiar as well,
here where you got your pituitary,
and you got your anterior pituitary,
which is always facing left.
And the anterior here, we have the glandular cells releasing,
as you saw the other day, ACTH.
Lots of this lecture is going to be
about the regulation of the adrenal cortical system--
the glucocorticoid system-- because it's
the best hormone on Earth.
And I'm willing to prove it.
But what we have here is ACTH coming out.
And you remember what you had the other day, which
is incorrectly named.
You've got CRH.
That's that business about the brain as an endocrine gland,
the brain releasing hormones into this little portal
circulatory system.
And out comes its characteristic pituitary hormone.
So what you saw the other day is CRH
is the hormone, the hypothalamic hormone
at the base of the brain here that's
released into this local circulatory system, which
stimulates these cells to dump ACTH
into the general circulation.
And that's the pattern you've gotten already
of neuroendocrine axis.
The brain releases a hormone into the local circulation,
which stimulates the pituitary to release
a typical hormone in response to it, which then goes and does
something rather to a distant gland.
You've got that one already.
You have Follicle Stimulating Hormone, releasing hormone
up here, which triggers Follicle Stimulating Hormone, which then
goes does something or other to your follicles or to your sperm
if you don't have follicles, and these sort
of three-step cascades.
What we see with the CRH system here
is one example of how you can also
have a version of multiple messengers.
Turns out CRH is not the only hormone coming out
of the base of the hypothalamus that could release ACTH
during stress.
And instead, you've got a whole array of these.
There are neurons in the hypothalamus that instead
release vasopressin into the circulation here,
others that release oxytocin, others that release
norepinephrine, others that release epinephrine.
And collectively, what they're doing
is stimulating the release of ACTH.
You have an entire array of these.
And a huge amount of work in the '80s
went into sorting this out.
And what's going on here-- what you have are stress signatures.
Different types of stressors will
trigger different orchestrations of these ACTH-releasing neurons
up there-- different orchestrations as to which
hormones bring it about.
And it will be things like low blood pressure or hypotension
will tend to trigger CRH and vasopressin.
Low blood sugar, I think, was CRH
and epinephrine and norepinephrine.
The whole point is that you get a signature up
at the hypothalamic level regulating
this release of ACTH.
Why have all these different ways of doing it?
Two advantages-- one is depending
on which orchestration of these you use, the shape of the ACTH
secretory curve will be different.
It's the same deal here.
You use two of these to get a short, rapid effect,
a more prolonged one.
Here, depending on which mixture you have,
you will have a different profile of ACTH secretion.
That's so you get control on that level.
The other thing is that each one of these not only
helps to release ACTH from the pituitary.
It does other stuff down here as well,
so that you get a way of coding under this sort of stressor
you want to release ACTH and do something or other in addition.
The way you bring it about is getting these two.
With some other stressor, you want
to secrete ACTH, and bring about some additional step there.
And you do it with these three-- that sort of thing.
So you get control over the shape of the stress response,
and to fine tune it there.
So here we've got this completely more complicated
picture of all these different releasers of ACTH.
In addition, just to make things even more complicated,
there are clearly hormones coming in there
which, instead of releasing ACTH from the pituitary,
they inhibit its release.
And they release their hormone into the circulation also.
And people have had evidence for these corticotropin-inhibiting
factors for decades and decades and decades.
And people have had an amazingly tough time trying to figure out
what these things actually are.
The best implicated molecule so far
is a peptide called Delta Sleep Inducing Factor.
Think about that-- you go to sleep.
And that's a very good time for turning off
your stress response.
So that making wonderful sense there.
The main point for our purposes is
you've got bi-directional control.
You've got a bunch of hormones that
stimulate the release of ACTH.
You've got at least one fairly well-implicated
that inhibits the release.
There is no way that there's not a whole bunch
of other ones doing the same sort of signature
coding at the inhibitory end.
And you've got different ways of translating different stressors
into different endocrine profiles.
And of course, what that winds up meaning
is you get stressed-- like your big toe is telling you
you just burned it-- and you are going to have projections
to a different array of these than if you
were getting stressed, you were thinking about mortality.
That's going to be having a different projection
profile onto these neurons.
What that suggests is a huge amount
of coding information going on in the brain
and the spinal cord producing these different arrangements
of how you dump out ACTH and the other hormones.
OK, so that as a first complication
in these various neural and endocrine systems.
You can actually have multiple neurotransmitters coming out
of the same neuron.
You can have an array of different hormones
that bring about the same general response,
but they differ in terms of fine-tuning the system.
Next elaboration-- one now having
to do with some spatial characteristics of how
these systems work.
And here we have the same exact neuron again.
And now we deal with Dale's law number one,
which is you know by now you get the depolarization here,
sufficient to get to the axon hillock.
You get your action potential.
All hell breaks loose-- very exciting ionic of events
of excitation-- all or none regenerating
go shooting down the axon to the axon terminals.
Dale's lawyer number one was you get an action potential started
here, and it is going to result in the release
of neurotransmitter from every single axon terminal.
So Dale's two laws-- an action potential causes
neurotransmitter to be released from every single axon
terminal of a neuron.
Dale's law number two just trashed.
And it's going to be the same neurotransmitter released
from every single axon terminal.
And Dale's law number one has held reasonably well,
except for some work by a guy.
And this is one of these sort of mad geniuses of neuroscience,
a guy at MIT named Jerry Lettvin.
What he did was, as far as I can tell,
he just sat around in a dark, sort of abandoned warehouse
for decades on end.
And about once every decade, he would
write a paper that would transform neuroscience.
And he actually was like this.
I met the guy once.
And it was one of the more terrifying experiences I had.
I was working in a lab where I had
to go get an oscilloscope from someplace, and pick up one
because ours was broken.
And everybody agreed the place to find
it was in Jerry Lettvin's warehouse
that he lived in, because he lived with oscilloscopes.
And going in there, and it was basically pitch dark.
And there was this sweaty, Sydney Greenstreet
kind of guy sitting there.
And he was in a ripped t-shirt.
And he had been in there for decades.
And he was chain smoking and sweating in there,
because it was 150 degrees.
So he spent a large part of the last part of the 20th century
inside that warehouse writing one paper per decade
that was transforming.
So this was his particular paper.
And I think this one was from the '70s.
And what he showed was that under some circumstances,
with him lined up with his hundreds of oscilloscopes
proving this, you in fact had a violation of Dale's law number
one, which was you can get blockades here
or there that would stop the action
potential from propagating down some
of the branches of this whole axonal treee--
in other words, a whole different domain of controlling
the flow of information.
More subtlety there-- neurons could
regulate which of their branches actually
were sending on the message.
And remarkably little has been learned in the years since then
as to how this works, let alone how common a phenomenon it is.
Most people wound up ignoring it.
What has since been shown also is the wave of excitation
that could come in through different dendritic spines
back at the end-- that there are ways in which branch points can
be sort of blocked on one side so that the flow is shunted
in one direction on the branches and not the other.
This is this whole unexplored world
suggesting there's all sorts of regulation going on
at these branch points.
It's not simply the case, action potential
and you are going to dump neurotransmitter
from every single axon terminal.
So down goes Dale on that one as well.
Equivalent over at the endocrine end--
and here we have our pituitary, which now no longer
has a brain connected to it.
But you've got the theme by now, which
is you've got the hypothalamic hormone
and out comes the pituitary hormone.
And there's a whole bunch of different pituitary hormones
producing the acronym flat bread, peg leg, flat, flat peg.
FLAT PEG-- go to your death bed remembering that acronym,
because it will make you happy and fulfilled.
OK, so here's a bunch of pituitary hormones,
and whatever verkakte acronym these guys came up with.
But what we have here, just to make life simpler,
is we'll focus in on four of them.
FLAT PEG-- so we're missing some of them there.
But we've got growth hormone that comes out,
prolactin ACTH, Follicle Stimulating Hormone.
I'm picking these completely randomly.
OK, in the simplest possible of worlds,
you would have all sorts of secretory cells, glandular
cells, sitting in here.
And each one of them is capable of secreting
all of those flat bread hormones coming out of there.
It could be doing that.
And it would simply be choosing which as a result of which
hypothalamic hormone is coming down the pike there.
That's not what you see.
Instead, you have specialized cells within the pituitary.
There's one type that only secretes growth hormone, which
causes somatic growth, somatic body, somatic something
or other.
And those are called somatotrophs,
and don't memorize that.
Ones that only secrete prolactin,
which cause lactation-- these are lactotrophs, corticotrophs,
gonadotrophs, something or other.
So all of these, in fact, have specialized cells.
Within the pituitary, there are cells
that specialize in releasing only one
of these types of hormones.
So you got into that.
So what would be the next simplest thing going on?
So here's the growth hormone releasing into the pituitary,
and there is going to be the ACTH releasing end.
No, that's not what you see.
Instead, there is a mosaic all across the pituitary of all
the different flat bread cell-secreting types there,
all throughout it.
OK, so that's just this mosaic.
Good, somebody was sloppy at the sort of fetal end gluing it
all together, and just scattered them all over.
And what winds up happening is you
get local, little neighborhood effects.
For example, here we have somatotrophs
that secrete growth hormone.
And one is in a FSH neighborhood and the other
is in a prolactin neighborhood.
And what you see is you throw in the hypothalamic hormone, which
causes growth hormone to get secreted.
And this particular cell is going
to be secreting totally different amounts of growth
hormone than this one will.
Because it's in a different sort of neighborhood.
And what's the implication of that?
There's all sorts of communication
going on between the individual cells in the pituitary.
And it depends on what sort of neighborhood
each particular cell is living in,
how it is responding to the hypothalamic signal coming
down, wildly complicating.
What that lets you do instead is different areas
of the hypothalamus will turf its hormones to different parts
of the pituitary where its particular cell
targets will be living in different sorts
of neighborhoods.
Simply more regulation, more complexity going on there.
Next theme that comes through in terms of elaboration--
we all have the negative feedback concept by now
that came through throughout the lectures last week.
The whole notion you get excited.
You release a neurotransmitter into your synapse
if you're a neuron.
You've got to do some regulation there.
You have to clean up after yourself.
You remove the neurotransmitter from the synapse.
You break down the neurotransmitter.
You have to finish the whole thing.
You are the endocrine system.
You are the brain.
And you have gotten it into your head
that you want your adrenals to secrete glucocorticoids.
And you start that whole cascade in which everywhere--
and you need to know when to stop secreting
those hormones up on top.
You need negative feedback information.
All of these biological systems are characterized
by that-- you have enzymes where this enzyme turns this
into this.
And how does it know when they should stop doing it?
When there is so much of this stuff
building up that this inhibits its activity.
You get negative feedback, feedback regulation.
You're making a lot of x.
And whatever is making it has to be able to measure
the levels of x.
That is the simple rule of all this negative feedback stuff.
So a first example on the neurobiological level-- so
what we have are what are called auto receptors.
What I inferred before, which is this weirdo world
in which you not only will have receptors
for a neurotransmitter exactly where they should
be on the post-synaptic neuron on the other side
of the synapse, but you will have them on the neuron that's
releasing the neurotransmitter.
It is an auto receptor.
It is a receptor right there on it.
What's it doing?
It's for bookkeeping.
What you have is some sort of rule.
If the neurotransmitters come pouring out of there,
and most of them go floating across-- let's assume
these are only red neurotransmitters here,
and bind to their red receptors there,
and do their thing to the next neuron.
And just thanks to the floating around,
random life in the Brownian synaptic sludge there,
a certain number of them are going to, instead, bind
to this one.
And all there has to be is some sort
of rule in this pre-synaptic neuron
that for every time one of these hits here,
it means I've released 1,000 copies
of this neurotransmitter, or 1,000 molecules of that.
And that's how I keep track of the numbers.
And I will have a rule that if it
gets below a certain level of my picking
up this bookkeeping signal, that will
be a signal to start making more of the stuff.
If I'm getting too much of a signal,
decrease the release-- feedback regulation along those realms.
This is where you see one of the elaborations
on this two-neurotransmitter business.
What you very often see is one of the neurotransmitters
will exclusively work on a pre-synaptic auto-receptor.
That one is stuck in there merely
in order to do the bookkeeping.
You would think neurons might have figured out
a more direct way of keeping track,
like how many vesicles they dump.
But instead, this theme is there is
some pre-synaptic auto-receptor, which tells you
on some statistical basis, every time we get buzzed at this end,
it means we buzz these guys 100 zillion times.
And that's how we keep track of how much we want to make--
negative feedback loops there.
You then see the exact same equivalent
in endocrine systems, which is all this negative feedback
stuff.
Something that was under-emphasized
in the endocrine lectures last week
has been this element of neuroendocrinology.
What you mostly heard about is what's
going to be most dominating in the classes
to come, which is hormones get into the brain
and change how you think, and feel, and behave,
and all of that stuff.
But also, some of the time what hormones are doing in the brain
is letting the brain know how much hormones there
were in the circulation, in order
to do the bookkeeping, the negative feedback regulation.
Your brain decides it wants to have this much growth
hormone in the bloodstream.
And thus, it releases its hypothalamic hormone,
which goes.
And all over, the pituitary gets those somatotrophs
to release growth hormone and does its thing elsewhere
in the body.
And the brain has to be measuring
some consequence of that growth hormone doing its thing,
measuring up there, in order to figure out,
have we gotten where we want to yet?
Same thing with prolactin.
Same thing with every one of those.
You have to have negative feedback regulation.
So what do you need to do to pull that off?
You need to have a part of the brain that
is sensitive to that hormone signal-- sensitive in some sort
of quantitative way, where it can, in effect, count
how much of the stuff there is in the bloodstream using
the exact same sort of rule.
If I've had one of those hormones in the circulation
come and bind to one of my receptors,
it means I have released 100 billion copies of it,
thanks to my starting this whole cascade.
Did we want 100 billion?
Did we want 107 billion?
Do we want 93 billion?
What do we do now?
Does that tell us we've completed what we want?
You get this negative feedback signal there.
So the first thing you have to have
is cells-- parts of the brain-- that will measure,
that will be responsive to a hormone signal.
Those cells have to be able to have some kind of set point
rule in there.
This is the point of life that I am at,
the point of my menstrual cycle.
This is the point of reaching adolescence.
This is the point of am I stressed or not?
This is the set point.
This is the amount of hormone I would
like to have in the bloodstream--
this particular type of hormone.
And what you need to then be able to do
is, if levels have not reached that set point yet,
you send a stimulatory signal to the hypothalamus.
Keep doing what you were doing.
We need to push the levels up higher.
And if the levels reach here or get even higher,
you need to be able to turn this into an inhibitory signal going
to the hypothalamus.
So what you see are all sorts of regions
of the brain that are sensitive to these various hormones, not
just in terms of hormones affecting
all the behaviors we're going to hear about,
but also negative feedback regulation-- so a way now
of showing just how much more complicated it can be.
So what would you assume is the general rule?
Here's an example of-- OK, let's make it simpler.
OK, so what would you expect to see?
You're able to measure CRH coming out
of the base of the hypothalamus.
And the deal is something stressful occurs,
and so it's pumping out CRH.
And at some point, you've got as much glucocorticoids
in the blood stream as the brain would
like for that sort of stressor.
And that leads to the negative feedback
signal, which stops the hypothalamus
from releasing CRH.
What measuring is the brain doing?
Most obvious version would be what
the brain does is measure how much glucocorticoids
are in the bloodstream.
And a simple rule, the more glucocorticoids
there are in the bloodstream, the more likely levels
are to have reached the threshold, the set
point, that you want.
So the higher the levels, the more of a negative feedback
signal.
And thus, the less CRH being secreted.
Totally straightforward, logical,
measuring the level of hormone in the bloodstream.
And this is how most endocrine negative feedback works.
Measuring how much of the stuff--
the more stuff there is, the greater the likelihood
that you shut down the system.
You put in the negative feedback signal.
But in addition, there's a whole other domain
of glucocorticoid negative feedback regulation,
where in this domain, what the brain
is doing is not measuring how much glucocorticoids
there are in the bloodstream, but measuring
the rate of change-- the rate at which levels are increasing.
And that's a totally different domain of information there.
Now what you're doing is measuring
how many units of increase per second are you getting.
And what you've got is this bizarre world there,
where you go from 10 units of glucocorticoids
in the bloodstream to 12 units in one minute.
And that means the same exact thing
as going from a million and 10 units to a million
and 12 units in the same length of time.
It's not measuring absolute levels.
It's measuring rate of change.
And the faster the rate of change, the less likely CRH
is to get secreted.
And it turns out there are some domains of stress responses
where what the brain is paying attention to
is rate of change of hormone in the bloodstream.
There are other circumstances where it's paying attention
to absolute level.
This tends to be what the brain listens
to very early on in a stress response.
This tends to be the more delayed response.
But totally different dynamics there-- cells that measure
the amount of hormone-- that's not
that hard to imagine-- number of receptors, stuff like that.
Cells that measure the rate of change,
where going from 10 to 12 is the exact same thing
as going from a million 10 to a million 12.
What is that wiring going to be like?
To this day, nobody has a clue.
This was first sort of figured out in the 1960s.
An amazing scientist up in UCSF named
Mary Dallman who just sat and out of sheer just modeling
work in terms of endocrine systems
predicted with glucocorticoids, there
are going to be two different domains of feedback.
There is going to be a rapid rate-of-change sensitive
system.
There is going to be a delayed level of hormone
in the bloodstream system.
And here's exactly why I'm predicting this.
And she turned out to be absolutely right.
And decades later, people still don't fully
understand how a cell measures the rate of change
of something independent of the absolute levels.
One thing that makes life a little bit easier
is it's different parts of the nervous system
that do each type here.
The very rapid rate-of-change stuff, in fact,
is not even occurring at the brain.
It's occurring at the level of the pituitary.
And thus, it's not so much regulating CRH release,
but ACTH release.
OK, complicated-- the main point of that
is, even something as logical as how
do you keep your toilet bowl sort of thing
from overflowing the tank in the back there?
You need a negative feedback signal.
You need a way for the toilet bowl tank
to measure how much water there is there, and the flotation
device, and for that to have a set point and a way of then
transducing, reaching that point into putting the lid
on the top of the pipe that's generating the water.
Totally all these logical negative feedback loop stuff,
and then suddenly, in these neuroendocrine systems,
you get much, much more subtle, complicated things going on.
In some cases, you have positive feedback.
The more of a hormone in the bloodstream,
the more you stimulate the system to do more.
You get that at certain points in reproduction--
reproductive life histories where
you have massive changes of estrogen, progesterone.
And what you have will be transient periods where
you have positive feedback.
All of these somehow have to get translated into how cells
are working-- very unclear.
OK, so negative feedback-- the next elaboration-- something
going on at the receptor level.
It's something known as auto-regulation.
And you could probably begin to figure out what
that one's about.
And it will make perfect sense as follows--
if somebody screams at you all the time,
you stop listening to them.
And what you have done is just down-regulated your sensitivity
to this pain-in-the-neck person.
If they give a very large signal,
you down-regulate your sensitivity to the signal.
If a signal, instead, becomes very weak,
very often you will increase the attention you pay to it.
You are showing auto-regulation.
Within the realm of neuroendocrine stuff,
you will be changing the amount of receptor
for a neurotransmitter or hormone
as a function of the levels in the bloodstream.
And thus, you have this logic-- if you
get a huge increase in the levels of some hormone
in the blood stream, there will be a likelihood
that various target tissues will begin
to down-regulate the number of receptors for that hormone
or neurotransmitter.
Conversely, levels go way down, they go right up.
And this is a general feature all
these neural and endocrine systems.
Why is that interesting?
When this regulatory, auto-regulatory stuff
screws up.
In principle, it should work perfectly.
OK, for some reason, there's a doubling
of the hormone message coming through
in the bloodstream under some circumstance
where it's going on for a long time.
And that's not right.
And somebody down at some gland down there
is messing up and drooling out way too much hormone.
So what are we going to do?
We have no idea what's up with them.
But you've doubled the level of hormone.
Most folks down there, OK, let's have
an auto-regulatory response.
Let's cut the number of our receptors
in half to compensate.
You can see in a rough way that's going to compensate.
So massively increase the signal thanks to some disease
state, something weird going on, and do a compensatory decrease.
Have some disease or abnormal state
where levels of some hormone or neurotransmitter
go way down-- what do you do?
Let's up the amount of receptor enough to compensate for it.
That's great.
Where problems occur is if you don't compensate quite enough,
or if you overshoot, if you begin to get a mismatch.
And that's where you've got problems.
We will see, as you read in the [INAUDIBLE] book--
with hopefully great detail-- the chapter on depression,
that's probably a critical thing that's happening.
Because we'll see with depression what's probably
wrong are levels of a few different neurotransmitters--
serotonin, dopamine, norepinephrine.
All of this is going to come soon.
And all of the standard anti-depressant drugs
change the levels of these neurotransmitters
in the bloodstream.
And that's great.
And we know just how it works, except there's always
a problem making sense of that.
Which is you throw in some of these standard drugs-- SSRIs,
things of that sort-- don't worry about the details.
All of this will come later.
The main point being that these anti-depressant drugs,
when you throw them in, they're changing
levels of neurotransmitters within minutes to hours.
You get somebody who is deeply depressed.
And you start them off on an SSRI like Prozac.
And they don't start feeling better for days to weeks.
There is some sort of lag time going on there.
And as people have sorted it out,
what the common sort of conclusion is,
these drugs are not working so much
by changing the levels of these neurotransmitters.
What they're really doing is by changing the levels,
they are eventually going to cause an auto-regulatory change
in the number of receptors.
And these change within minutes to hours.
These change within days to weeks.
And that's what these drugs are probably doing.
We will go through that.
Just to give you a sense of how awful it is going to get,
there are some reasons to think that some
of these anti-depressant drugs work
not by changing the level so much of this neurotransmitter,
or not so much secondarily causing
an auto-regulatory change here, but instead,
causing an auto-regulatory change in these auto-receptors.
Unbelievably complicated.
We will come to that.
For our purposes right now, what that
begins to tell you is that certainly,
the amount of hormone and the amount of neurotransmitter
makes a difference.
The amount of receptor, as well.
And have big pathological changes
in the levels of the messengers.
The body attempts to regulate with auto-regulatory changes.
And a lot of what disease is about
is overshooting or undershooting.
So that's one realm within the nervous system--
neurotransmitters-- pertinent to depression.
OK within endocrine systems, an equivalent one
is as follows-- something that you
see that goes wrong in diabetes-- adult-onset
diabetes.
One of the things you have is a number of ways things
can go wrong.
But what your body does is, when there's
glucose in the bloodstream, when you've just
had a meal, when you have all these nutrients
in the bloodstream, your pancreas
can detect the levels of glucose in your bloodstream
and secretes insulin.
Sugar shows up in the bloodstream-- glucose.
You secrete insulin.
And what insulin does is tell your fat cells
to absorb the sugar and store it away.
Great, but you've got a problem, which
is that your fat cells are already full.
Because you are a typical Westernized human,
and you've been eating to excess.
And what you have is fat cells that are full up.
And they stop listening to insulin, because they
can't take it anymore.
Because they can't take up any more stuff and store it away.
The cells begin to be insulin resistant.
And we'll see in a minute how that works.
So suddenly, you have fat cells that
aren't responding to insulin.
And what happens is your pancreas says, this is crazy.
We're trying to get rid of the sugar from the bloodstream.
And it's not disappearing.
The person just ate eight Hershey bars,
and their fat cells are already full.
But we're not clearing the sugar out of the bloodstream.
So let's secrete even more insulin.
And let's secrete even more insulin.
And what happens at the fat cells, they say,
this is ridiculous.
We're full up.
Forget it.
We're not taking up any more of these nutrient things.
And in fact, what we're going to do is,
we're going to decrease the number of our insulin
receptors.
We're going to down-regulate our number of insulin receptors.
And the pancreas freaks out, and secretes even more insulin
as a result.
And you down-regulate even more.
And what you have is this downward spiral.
Because at some point, your pancreas
is working so hard to dump these boatloads of insulin
into the bloodstream that your body's paying no attention to,
that you burn out the cells in your pancreas that
make insulin.
And now you've got yourself a real serious problem.
What's the key of what's gone wrong here?
Too much nutrients, and thus too much insulin.
And the fat cells begin to say, we're
not going to listen to it.
And they down-regulate receptors.
More insulin, down-regulate, down-regulate-- and this
is at the core of what goes wrong in diabetes.
So we see these auto-regulatory changes.
And they can emerge slowly.
They can help explain why some of these drugs work.
Almost certainly, they help explain
what's wrong in some of these psychiatric diseases,
metabolic diseases.
What's the punchline there?
Number one, the amount of a messenger is important,
but the sensitivity to the messenger
is at least as important.
You have as much capacity to regulate this
as this in these biological systems,
and thus you have as much potential
for screwing up at this end as screwing up
with the amount of messenger.
Yeah, did I see a hand up someplace?
Yes.
[INAUDIBLE] but wouldn't the SSRI example, then,
be the opposite of what you're saying [INAUDIBLE]?
Because you'd expect increasing neurotransmitters
to eventually cause a decrease in receptors.
So you should see that [INAUDIBLE].
Great, OK.
Don't listen to anything she just said,
because she's just gotten to an incredibly subtle, complicated
point about how this stuff works.
Go and read, and memorize, and recite to your roommates
the section on the zebra chapter about-- the section
in zebras-- on depression, looking
at the paradoxical things where, at the end of the day,
people are not sure say, an SSRI, a selective serotonin
re-uptake inhibitor.
What it does is it blocks the re-uptake of serotonin.
And thus, you wind up with more serotonin in the bloodstream.
Somebody feels less depressed.
I bet their problem was they didn't have enough serotonin.
Work through the logic of all this auto-regulatory stuff
going on.
And people still are not positive
if the problem with depression is too little serotonin or too
much.
Because depending on whether the auto-regulation partially
compensates, completely, whether it overshoots,
and whether it's these receptors or these,
will completely determine whether the problem
is too much or too little of a neurotransmitter-- incredibly
complicated, exactly some of the complexities there.
And that is so complicated, in fact,
that it is essential that everybody
stand up now and go to the bathroom for five minutes.
OK, again, back from the other [INAUDIBLE] day.
Your pituitary is releasing all sorts
of different types of hormones under the control
of all sorts of different types of hormones
signaling from the brain.
What you get is, the pituitary is not just
made up of one type of cell that can secrete
every single type of hormone and response
to each type there of messenger from the brain.
Instead, you've got specialized cells.
You've got types of pituitary cells
that only secrete prolactin in response
to what's happening there, types that only secrete ACTH,
or secrete luteinizing hormone, follicle stimulating hormone,
so on.
OK, so they're specialized cells.
Rather than having one part of the pituitary, which
is the we're in charge of secreting growth hormone
neighborhood, and one part that's the we do prolactin,
and rather than it being broken up like that,
instead, it's just a mosaic of all the different types that
are scattered throughout there.
So that would initially just seem like sheer sloppiness.
Embryology-- they didn't quite get it together
to have discrete neighborhoods, that sort of thing.
But it's just scattered there.
What's interesting about that is,
you will see any given cell in the pituitary
will go about its business, which
is responding to its specific hypothalamic signal
by secreting whichever hormone it specializes in.
Every single cell in the pituitary going
about its business will be a little bit more or less
sensitive to its hypothalamic signal,
depending on what sort of neighborhood it's living in,
depending on which other types of these cells
it's surrounded by.
So that you will get, for example,
FSH secreting cells, when they tend
to be in a GH neighborhood, are far more
responsive to their signal than when
they're in an ACTH neighborhood or one that's
a hodgepodge of any of these.
I don't know what the rules are.
But what you've got there are increased
ways for regulation of the amount of secretion
by determining which way you, the hypothalamus,
turf the signals.
Are you aiming for these types?
Or are you aiming for these types?
More regulation that way-- how does that work?
What it has to be is all sorts of communication going on
amongst the various pituitary cells.
So the pituitary is not just sitting there passively
responding to whatever the hypothalamus is saying.
Instead, there's all this local regulatory stuff happening.
One additional thing that was asked-- so
in this case, what we go back to is
that business of the more glucocorticoids
in the bloodstream in this boring, level-sensitive domain
of you're just measuring how much of the stuff
there is in the bloodstream, you're
measuring there-- some part of the brain
is measuring the levels of glucocorticoids.
And the part is actually known.
It's measuring there, and it has its rule.
Once glucocorticoid levels get this high,
I will send an an inhibitory signal to those CRH neurons.
And as a result, they'll secrete less CRH.
And that turns off the stress response.
The more glucocorticoids in the bloodstream,
the more of a negative feedback signal.
What the person brought up was the very astute observation
that wait, what about all those other types
up there-- oxytocin, vasopressin, epinephrine?
What that means is there are sensors
that are talking to each one of those types there.
And the brain at any given point,
depending on the stressor, is saying,
well, we want this much CRH, and we
want this much of vasopressin and this much oxytocin.
And we're going to determine it all
by measuring the level and the shape of glucocorticoid levels
in the bloodstream, so that there's feedback going on--
not just onto the CRH neurons, but to all those other types
of neurons as well-- incredibly messy and complicated,
nonetheless very elegant.
Pushing on-- next version of complications.
Now what we've got is another feature
of how receptors go about their business.
This general principle doesn't apply all the time.
But in general, more of a ligand for a receptor.
A ligand, for folks not familiar with this,
a neurotransmitter is a ligand for a neurotransmitter
receptor.
A hormone is a ligand for a hormone receptor.
The ligand is whatever the receptor normally binds.
So this general-- not universal, but general-- rule
of the higher the ligand levels, the more likely
you are to trigger this compensatory down-regulation
to lower the levels, all of that.
Here's another level of regulation that can go on.
So you've got these receptors.
They are complicated, because their job
is to bind their ligand and to then do something or other.
And the cell, as a result, opens up
some channel that allows a change in excitability
in the neuron, that sort of thing.
These receptors tend to be very complicated.
And what you wind up seeing is, in lots of realms of receptors
for different types of hormones, neurotransmitters, et cetera,
you actually have the receptor made up
of a number of different proteins,
of a complex of proteins.
So that for example, here we have a receptor that's
binding a ligand that looks like that, just like your premolars.
And what you have there is, it's got
to come up with a complementary shape and lock and key,
blah, blah, all of that.
And in this particular case, this receptor complex
is made up of three different proteins that
are needed to pull this off-- three different proteins, three
different genes-- a receptor being
coded for by multiple genes.
When you get the more fancy, complicated receptors
they tend to be complexes of more than one protein forming
this pattern.
So you've got multiple genes.
That's interesting.
And of course, we're off and running with that.
What that means, then, is you've got
the potential for variation, different flavors
of the different genes, more different ways
that this could appear.
There's two different variants on this gene.
There's 17 on this one.
And you just do the combinatorial stuff.
And thus, you've got a huge number
of ways of generating different versions of that same receptor,
which, of course, will work a little bit better, or a little
slower, or a little whatever-- variation like that.
Next complexity that you get with receptors--
you can have a receptor that's made up
of three different proteins.
And there's four different genes that
make proteins that can help construct
one of these receptors.
So you can make a receptor out of proteins 1, 2, 3, or 1, 2,
4, or 1, 3, 4, or off you go with that.
Or you can make a receptor out of three copies of number one,
or two copies of number two and one copy of number four.
There's these possibilities of all these different subunits
being different-- variability that way.
So another realm of regulation is
when cells change the subunits on their receptors,
when cells will cause, say, degradation of-- OK,
so here we've got this three-protein receptor complex.
And there's four different proteins
that potentially plug into it.
And this version has one copy of A, one copy of B,
and one copy of C. Something may happen
which will cause the neuron to degrade the copies of B
and replace it with D, or replace it
with another copy of A, replace all this combinatorial stuff,
and thus change a little bit how well the receptor is
doing its job.
And you see these subunit changes all over the place.
One domain, in terms of the neurobiology neurotransmitter
stuff-- aspects of glutamate receptors--
you guys heard something about that the other day-- glutamate
receptor's essential for learning,
very complicated receptors, insanely complicated.
Part of what learning appears to be about
is not only increasing the number
of copies of a certain type of glutamate receptor,
but changing the subunit composition,
and making for a more responsive, more excitable
version of that receptor.
There's other realms with a different type of receptor
where, in fact, you've got an abnormal subunit that's
not supposed to be there.
And as a result, this now produces
a cell that is prone towards insanely high levels
of excitation.
This is a congenital reason for causing epilepsy.
This is one of the genetic forms of epilepsy, where you've
got the wrong subunit winding up in another neurotransmitter
and its receptor.
All we're seeing here is lots of room for more regulation
here, mixing and matching, changing the subunit stuff.
That's how you begin to do that critical principle.
Remember, all the stuff from the basic functioning,
the flow of information from the dendrites
to the axon hillock-- what's that all about?
No single dendritic input is enough to trigger an action
potential.
Instead, you have to have enough of them, enough summation,
to reach the threshold that the axon hillock has to initiate
the action potential.
And the threshold could change over time.
Translate that into this.
What does it mean when an axon hillock's threshold is changed?
Those critical first channels that open up-- you've
changed the subunit composition.
So that is a theme all throughout this world
of receptorology and channels that open and close and stuff,
where cells can change which are the pieces that make it up,
and change the properties subtly.
Similar theme that could come through with hormone
receptors-- same exact deal.
A whole bunch of them are multi-protein complexes--
exact same story.
You can see something a little different when you
have steroid hormone receptors.
And as we saw the other week, remember,
it's got two domains-- one which binds the hormone--
glucocorticoid, just to pick a random steroid or estrogen,
progesterone, or whatever-- and one that binds to the promoter
element in the DNA.
We've got our if/then clause.
If and only if this steroid hormone shows up,
then you go and you activate that gene--
our conditional clause.
But what turns out to be the case
is all sorts of steroid hormone receptors
have various other proteins that they bind there.
Co-factors is the term given for it.
And you get different arrays of co-factors in different cell
types.
And as a result, when you activate this,
it will do different things in different cell types--
cell-type specific coding.
And of course, the exact same theme
here-- under some circumstances, cells
will change which cofactors they have
holding onto those receptors.
So what we see here are these additional layers
of potential regulation.
More complexities-- next one-- now
we've hurdled past the notion of only one type
of neurotransmitter per neuron.
We have hurdled past the notion of the same action
potential will be manifest in every single axon terminal.
Now we see all sorts of additional information built
around changing the number of receptors,
changing the composition of them, regulating those ways.
One additional complication here with these receptors,
which is a lot of them can bind more than one thing,
can bind more than one ligand.
And we see an amazing example of this at the neurotransmitter
end of the world.
You guys heard about the neurotransmitter GABA.
GABA is the main inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain.
It is the workhorse for doing that.
The GABA receptor-- no surprise-- binds GABA.
Its ligand is GABA.
It is found on the dendritic spines
of GABA-responsive neurons.
And the neurons just upstream of it
will release GABA in response to its action potential,
and just goes about its thing.
So what does the GABA receptor do?
It binds GABA.
And when it binds GABA, something or other
happens so that this neuron becomes less excitable.
It's an inhibitory neurotransmitter.
It turns out the GABA receptor is insanely complicated.
It is, instead, a receptor complex
of a whole bunch of different proteins.
And what the GABA receptor does is
it binds some other things as well--
three different classes, all of which are very interesting.
The first class of additional things that it binds
are things called major tranquilizers.
What does the GABA complex bind?
And here we have our GABA receptor.
And GABA fits right in there.
And it turns out the GABA receptor also
has another binding site here for major tranquilizers.
What are major tranquilizers?
Barbiturates-- this is how barbiturates work in the brain.
There are not barbiturate receptors.
They bind to the GABA receptor.
There is a side complex on it.
There is a minor binding site on the GABA receptor
for barbiturates.
OK, so GABA, inhibitory neurotransmitter-- when
barbiturates are around, does that increase or decrease
GABA signaling?
OK, who says increase?
Who says decrease?
Who says, what?
OK, me, too.
I wasn't listening either.
I'll tell you, lurking around in the back
during those TA's lectures, you really
do get a sense of what interesting, non-academic
things are going on people's computer screens.
But I digress.
So what barbiturates do is they make GABA more inhibitory--
inhibitory enough that you keel over.
And now they can slice you open for surgery.
This is how one of the main classes of surgical anesthetics
work.
Then there is another binding site
on the GABA receptor complex.
And what that does is it binds the minor tranquilizers.
And what are those?
We've heard about those a bunch of times already.
Those are the benzodiazepine, the valium, and the librium.
And they work there as well.
And we've already heard about how
anxiety disorders in some rodent lines
are related to different versions
of the gene for the benzodiazepine receptor.
We've just defined what that gene is.
That gene codes for one of the subunits of this massive GABA
complex.
So there's another domain there that binds benzodiazepines--
the minor tranquilizers.
What do they do?
They increase the force of GABA signaling as well?
Do they do it as much as the major tranquilizers?
Of course it's not the case, because you wouldn't call
them minor tranquilizers then.
These guys potentiate GABA signaling a moderate amount.
These guys potentiate it enormously.
So now we have these additional factors binding to these GABA
receptors.
A third class-- and this is, in lots of ways
the most interesting one of all, which
is an additional binding site there.
That responds to a hormone or a derivative of a hormone.
What is it responding to?
Derivatives of progesterone.
Progesterone has a binding site on the GABA receptor.
Progesterone is a steroid hormone.
It's normally doing its thing here.
And now we have, instead, having a minor slot there on the side
there that responds to progesterone.
What does progesterone do?
It also potentiates the effects of GABA.
What's that about?
Two implications-- one is, in the 1950s,
one of the most common surgical anesthetics used
was a drug called Althesin, and it was
a derivative of progesterone.
People in the '50s would be anesthetized
with this supposedly reproductive steroid hormone,
because it has this effect on the then undiscovered GABA
receptor.
It potentiates inhibitory GABA signaling.
That's weird.
So progesterone-- clearly, this relationship
did not evolve so that people could do surgery
on people who didn't want to get major tranquilizers,
and instead deal with the progesterone route.
Where is this relevant?
It seems to have something to do with some of the mood shifts
over the course of the reproductive cycle.
There are reasons, and pretty good evidence
in lots of domains, where perimenstrual syndrome--
pre-menstrual syndrome, PMS-- which
is more accurately called perimenstrual--
both before and after.
What that involves, clearly in some women,
is a shortage of progesterone having
some of these minor tranquilizing effects
by way of the GABA receptor complex.
So this is incredibly complicated stuff
going on here, as you can see.
Final domain-- final interesting elaboration,
which is now bringing in a whole additional concept--
and deserves a board all of its own.
So here we have circular neurons.
And what we've got is, this is the neuron we're interested in.
What's it up to?
And this is neuron A. And just to force
some cognitive flexibility, this is neuron B,
going in the wrong direction.
So we've got neuron B releases an excitatory neurotransmitter,
and thus, excites A. OK, this is not earth shattering.
It's probably releasing, say, glutamate for example.
So remember GABA-- that inhibitory neurotransmitter
we just heard about.
So GABA does inhibitory stuff.
So maybe there is a GABA neuron here sending its projection,
and this one is inhibitory.
Notice what we've done by turning neurons into spheres.
We've lost all the little dendritic spines.
So translate that into back to what it actually looks like.
This is just schematic.
So we've got two inputs.
We've got an excitatory input by way of glutamate.
We have an inhibitory one with GABA.
What does that imply?
Dendritic spines in this neuron contain both receptors
for glutamate and receptors for GABA.
That would be straightforward.
That would be simple, if that's how it works.
That's not what you see.
Instead, GABA neurons never send a projection
onto what would be neuron A. What
they do is they send a projection onto neuron B.
What's that about?
What's that about is what GABA is doing
is making this neuron less excitable.
It's working as an inhibitory neurotransmitter.
It's making this neuron less excitable.
What's happening here-- this neuron
has just started an action potential
that's coming down the axon.
And thanks to a heavy GABA signal coming out,
it silences it.
It never gets to the end, and dumps the neurotransmitter.
This is totally weird.
This is completely different from all the wiring
you've seen already.
What's bizarre about it?
Number one, this is a neuron forming synapses
not on the dendrites of this neuron.
It's forming a synapse on the axon of this.
And thus, we have what is termed an axoaxonic synapse.
What does that also imply?
That there have to be GABA receptors sitting there
at the pre-synaptic end-- just as
bizarre as the pre-synaptic autoreceptors.
Remember, those are for measuring the amount
of release-- bookkeeping stuff.
But here, this is perfectly conventional
neuronal responding to a neurotransmitter,
but coming at the completely wrong end
with this weird axoaxonic projection.
But what's most important here is seeing this implication.
So what is it that this neuron does to A?
What does this GABA neuron do to the excitability of A?
And the answer is, it does nothing.
It has no effect on the excitability of A.
What this GABA neuron does is alter the ability of neuron B
to do something to A. This neuron
has no direct effect here.
What it does is it modulates the activity of this neuron.
And thus, you have a whole new class of type of communication.
Technically, rather than working as a neurotransmitter,
it would be termed GABA typically
serves a neuromodulatory role in the nervous system.
And that's this wonderful conditional clause
yet again-- yet another if/then clause.
GABA decreases excitability if and only
if this neuron is trying to send an excitatory signal.
All that GABA does is snuff out an excitatory signal
coming down here-- so modulation in that regard.
We've already seen another example of that writ small.
Back to the GABA complex here.
What do the major tranquilizers do there?
What do barbiturates do?
They do not make this neuron less excitable.
What they do is, if and only if there is GABA coming in,
it makes the GABA work even better.
The tranquilizers do not inhibit the neuron.
The tranquilizers modulate, potentiate,
the activity of GABA.
The minor tranquilizers the same thing, the progesterone
the same thing.
So this is a different level of this concept
of neuromodulation-- if/then clauses
all over the place here.
So if and only if GABA is doing its thing,
any of these minor ligands will potentiate it.
If and only if this neuron is trying to stimulate here,
GABA will have an inhibitory effect on the whole system.
So you see lots and lots of this modulatory stuff.
Final example, seeing the same principle of modulation,
now occurring in an endocrine system.
OK, so now we're measuring the amount of ACTH coming out
of the pituitary, and back to that deal
that we've got all these different ways
in which the brain can cause the release of ACTH.
And starting off, we saw CRH.
So suppose you throw in some CRH on top of the pituitary
there, inject it into the circulation.
And this much ACTH comes out.
OK, that's good.
Now, instead of putting on CRH, you put in both CRH
and vasopressin-- a second one of those.
And what do you see?
That's perfectly logical.
You've got two things driving ACTH secretion.
Now you put on vasopressin just by itself.
And what you get is this.
You get no secretion.
Does vasopressin stimulate the release of ACTH?
No, it doesn't.
What vasopressin does is it potentiates
the activity of CRH.
It modulates CRH's activity.
Vasopressin does nothing by itself.
If and only if there is CRH getting
to those pituitary cells, then vasopressin
will potentiate its actions.
All of those other releasors-- the vasopressin,
the oxytocin, epinephrine, norepinephrine-- none of them
are direct releasors on their own.
They all are modulating, potentiating CRH's effects.
So what we've got here is this enormous realm
of complexity of all of these if/then
clauses, various hormones that are not directly
causing anything, neurotransmitters that are not
directly causing anything, ligands for receptors
that are not, either.
What they're all doing is, if and only
if something else is happening, something else is going on,
there's an additional ligand, they
do their thing-- lots and lots of these conditional clauses.
More complexity there.
OK, so what does all of this get us here at the end?
Obvious-- lots of individual variability,
lots of ways in which these systems are changing
in response to experience, all that subunit changing business.
Something happens and you get rid of one subunit.
Replace it with another, and you've changed
the excitability of the system.
All sorts of over and over conditional if/then clauses,
tremendous increase in the complexity.
These themes will come through again and again
in the second half of the course.
So let's stop at this point.
Are there any questions, since this was a major download?
Check the extended notes.
Are the extended notes posted yet?
Not yet.
They will be some time or other.
OK, any questions?
OK, so go read those notes as soon as they're up.
 OK, and-- is this audible?
No.
It's really quiet.
Really quiet.
Something's wrong with the sound system today.
How's that?
No.
How's that?
[LAUGHTER]
Placebo?
Maybe that would have worked?
OK, well, I guess I will just have to shout out.
But--
OK, help?
[INAUDIBLE]
[INAUDIBLE] falling off.
Was I doing it--?
That's fine, yeah.
OK.
Good.
So let's see.
That is an event you probably should check out.
I'm still irritated you didn't want a signed football for me,
but nonetheless--
OK, so, starting off, as the large numbers of empty seats
imply, not only is Monday the midterm
but today's not a topic that we covered on the midterm.
So, in case you want to flee right now, here's your chance.
I won't be upset.
But what we do here is a look at our last topic
of our buckets-- in this case, our neurobiology one.
And the whole premise for this one
is to cover the most wonderful, interesting parts
of the brain, which you're going to hear squat about when
you wind up in medical school.
Again, from the other day, what they will teach you
about endlessly is stuff that goes
wrong with your spinal cord or stuff
that goes wrong with parts of your brain
that regulate your bladder and your balance and motoric stuff.
How come-- because--
Yes?
You can't hear a thing.
No.
No.
Um-- [NOISE OF HELPLESSNESS]
He's going to try to find the sound guy.
OK, somebody's off to get sound.
But in the meantime, I will pantomime bladder problems.
So what you've got-- I will try-- maybe in the back,
just start waving each time I start hypoventilating
and run out of volume.
But what you've got here is not the part of the nervous system
that's easy to find out about, because it's
right on the surface.
Not the part that people focus on,
because there's a lot of spinal-cord injuries
and you can tell exactly what's wrong by which
toe is no longer moving.
This is, instead, focusing on the part
of the brain most centrally involved
in emotion-- the limbic system.
Now-- obvious why that should be of interest to us,
more so than spinal pathways controlling movement.
And, in terms of making sense of the limbic system,
this is going to be the most horribly, multisyllabic,
diagram-laden class of the entire class.
But, in terms of making sense of it, what we will see
is there's some very, very logical things going
on-- very logical strategies.
OK.
Originally, the limbic system was not
known as the "limbic system" but instead
had a name reflecting the fact that people started off
studying it in rats.
And you take a rat brain, which looks
kind of like this from the side, and you've
got your spinal cord and cerebellum and cortex.
And what is this thing, at the way front, there?
This is the olfactory bulb.
This is the olfactory system of a rodent brain.
And this is drawn exactly to scale, down to the millimeter.
This is huge.
This thing is huge.
The olfactory bulb and its projections
are 40% of the brain of a rodent.
And when people began to understand where the neurons
in the olfactory bulb were sending their projections,
it was an area of the brain, the underside of the brain,
which people very quickly began to call this region
the "rhinencephalon"-- the "nose-brain."
Because, obviously, this is what was processing
all this whomping great amount of olfactory information coming
in.
And this area that we now know and love
as the "limbic system" at the time
was called the "rhinencephalon."
This dominated, early on, with the neuroanatomists,
which is to say the people who just sat there and said,
gee whiz, that's an awfully large part of the brain, there.
And where does it send its projections?
As people instead, in the '30s and '40s,
began to understand the function of this part of the brain, what
emerged was a very different viewpoint,
from a different school, which is,
it's doing all sorts of stuff with emotion.
And this picture of this region of the brain
as having that role.
For reasons I don't completely understand,
somehow the people who liked the, it's all about emotion,
started calling it the "limbic system."
And thus you had one of the most central conflicts
of the 20th century, which was whether this thing should
be called the "rhinencephalon" or the "limbic system."
And thousands of innocent people were slaughtered
before it was all over with.
Brother pitted against brother savagery.
And what we've got-- much of Picasso's paintings
were about some of the atrocities committed
by the rhinencephalon people.
But what wound up ultimately happening
was a completely logical resolution.
"Rhinencephalon," "limbic system"-- is it about odor?
Is it about emotion?
And all you have to do is think like an ethologist,
and you've got your answer.
Which is, if you're a rat, there's
not an emotion on earth that's not intertwined with olfaction.
The rat's emotional world is utterly
driven by olfactory information.
And thus, for a rat, the rhinencephalon, the nose-brain,
is the part of the brain getting all the information
coming in that has any relevance to
the good, interesting, emotional stuff going on in a rat's life.
So there's massive resolution.
Peace in their time.
Suddenly, this recognition that, of course,
a rhinencephalon is going to be sending projections--
is going to be all a part of the part of the brain that's
doing emotion for you.
Now, of course, as well-trained ethologists,
you should immediately be having a relevant thought already,
which is, well, so what's up with
the [? rhinencephalon-fame ?] nose-brain limbic system
in a species that's not some smelly rodent thing?
In a species, for example, that's
paying attention to an enormous amount of, say, auditory stuff.
How about all those birds, with the birdsong
business going on, or auditory displays of territoriality,
or things of that sort?
And you look in those brains, and the limbic system
is not the rhinencephalon, in terms of what part of the brain
is disproportionately enlarged and what part of the brain
is sending projections into the limbic system.
Look at a bird brain, and it is not a rhinencephalon,
it's an ear encephalon or something or other.
And you've got to think like an ethologist.
And suddenly you're in a world where
something as bizarre as electric fish, who communicate socially
through electricity, have electroreceptors
which are sending a lot of information
to this part of the brain.
It is not the nose-brain, it is the, among other things,
"getting whatever sensory information
is most pertinent to my emotional life"
part of the brain.
So the limbic system, initially utterly viewed
as intertwined with olfaction, now instead recognizing,
as good neuroethologists, what it's really about.
OK.
So, as an introduction to it, we need
to start off with a very simplified, quick overview
of large parts of the nervous system.
You got bits of this last week.
But, just to give an initial overview,
here, just to orient what's happening.
And what we see, here-- and, again, a very accurate,
technically drawn diagram-- you see the brain comes
in three different pieces.
And each one has a different color.
And this reflects the work of a guy named Paul MacLean, one
of the giants in the field.
And everyone is required to say his name, at this point.
And this model that he came up with in the 1950s or so--
the triune brain-- the three-layer model of what
brain function is about.
So what you have is the most central, ancient, archaic, most
phylogenetically conserved-- which is a fancy
way of saying that, all sorts of vertebrates out there,
this part of the brain is basically the same.
This is the hypothalamus, talking to the pituitary.
This is the pathways going from the hypothalamus
down the spinal-cord areas called "brain stem,"
"mid brain."
This is what MacLean called the "reptilian" part of the brain,
reflecting the fact that our section, here,
is a whole lot like the type you would find in a reptile.
This is the ancient stuff that does the purely automatic,
regulatory things.
You've got neurons, here, that have to tell you something
about temperature regulation.
Ooh, back to that endocrinology stuff.
Let's see.
What's a hormone that's got something
to do with metabolism, body temperature, thyroid hormone?
So you remember the hypothalamus being part of that cascade.
The hypothalamus has a relevant hormone
for the pituitary, which then tells your thyroid
gland all of that.
So how does the hypothalamus need to know what's going on?
That same feedback information stuff from the other day.
There's got to be neurons in the hypothalamus that
can tell your temperature.
And-- too cold?
Let's get some more thyroid hormone out.
Great.
That makes complete sense, in terms of regulatory loops.
Totally boring.
OK.
So this is a part of the brain that keeps your body
temperature right.
It keeps your blood glucose levels sort of modulated
in some ways.
It talks a lot to the pancreas.
It does stuff like-- it's monitoring your blood pressure
in various places, it's remembering
that you're running hard, so let's tell the heart
to beat a little bit faster.
Completely boring stuff.
Just robotic, regulatory circuitry and loops, there.
So this ancient, reptilian part of the brain.
Totally boring part of the brain--
until you get something wrong with that part of the brain,
and suddenly it seems mighty interesting.
Remind me-- how many of you were in Biocore?
OK, lots of folks.
People in there will remember, I told you
about one of the all-time creepy diseases
that you do not want to get, which
is called "Ondine's curse," which
is where you get some lesions, some stroke damage,
to one of these midbrain areas.
This part of the brain that does something very boring,
until it doesn't do it for you anymore.
Ondine was apparently some Greek nymph or something
that Zeus was hitting on unsuccessfully at some point
and greatly frustrated.
He put this Olympian curse on her,
which was that she had Ondine's curse.
Or maybe Ondine's curse was what she
had to say about him in return.
But what this was about is, she lost the capacity
to do automatic breathing.
Whoa!
That's a drag!
Automatic breathing, in that you're
just sort of going along, there, breathing now and then.
And we do that pretty eptly, as opposed to ineptly.
And what you don't have to do is stop and say,
whoa-- this would be a good time to expand my diaphragm,
or whatever it is you do there.
But you've got a lesion in this part of the brain,
and you lose the capacity for automatic breathing.
OK, somebody who's not in Biocore,
tell me what do you die of, if you have Ondine's curse?
Oop-- who just mumbled that?
[INAUDIBLE] asphyxiation.
Asphyxiation, good.
OK, and at what particular time?
When you fall asleep?
Yeah.
Or, you actually don't die of asphyxiation
when you're falling asleep.
How come?
Because you keep waking up.
You fall asleep, and 30 seconds later you
wake up because you're on the edge of asphyxiation.
You die of sleep deprivation.
How's that for one creepy thing to have happen to you?
So you can start obsessing over that, as an eventual problem.
Here's the boring part of the brain, this reptilian stuff.
We do this part of the brain exactly the same way
that lizards do.
Sitting on top of it is the area that we now
put all of our attention and love
upon, which is the limbic system, this emotional part
of the brain which we will soon see in sickening detail.
The limbic system is mostly a mammalian invention.
Birds, reptiles, fish do not have especially complex
emotional lives.
Uh-oh-- there's people from Russ Fernald's lab in here.
Do not tell him I just said that.
But--
[LAUGHTER]
Yeah.
Not a word about it.
OK.
But it is mostly a mammalian invention,
greatly expanding the limbic system,
emotional complexity-- stay tuned.
The next hour and a half is about what
is much more subtle than saying ooh,
this does emotions for you.
Sitting on top is the cortex, the gleaming,
analytical machine of cortical function and cognitive
expertise that we have.
This is something that all sorts of species out there--
fish and birds and-- not bees, but birds and almost bees.
And what you got there is one that nonetheless is greatly
expanded in vertebrates and mammals
and greatly expanded, even more so, in primates
and even more so than in us.
And, as we will see, one area of the cortex which
is really very uniquely human and very intertwined
with the limbic system.
As we'll see, what is critical in making sense of the cortex,
with respect to all this stuff-- this limbic,
emotion, behavior stuff, and everything
coming for the rest of the course--
is the rumors of the cortex being
this rational, independent, analytical part of the brain
that goes about its business while all
this hormonal-emotional muck is going on south of it,
is completely wrong.
All sorts of aspects of cortical function
are being influenced by hormones and thus, indirectly,
under the regulation of here, all sorts
of aspects of cortical function are being influenced
by the limbic system.
And all you have to do to appreciate
that is think back on times of extreme emotional duress
and arousal where you made some incredibly stupid decision that
seemed like a brilliant idea at the time.
Therein is proof that your limbic system
is able to influence decision-making going on
up in the cortex.
And, as we will see, of great relevance to us
as a fancy species-- the cortex has vast ability
to influence stuff going on below there.
And all you need to do to prove that is sit and think
about the fact that you are not going to live forever.
And suddenly this part of the brain
is going to be kicking out CRH and things like that.
And you've just done it with thought.
There's bidirectionality that completely
does in the notion that-- here's the emotional part
of the brain, here's the cognitive part.
And that's completely, completely wrong,
that they're separable.
Major figure in the field-- a guy named
Antonio Damasio, who's probably the best thinker about any
of this stuff, had a book a number of years
ago called Descartes' Error.
Descartes, who saw that there was
this great potential separation between thought and emotion.
And that's complete nonsense.
So, starting off merely on an anatomical level-- which
is to say, which neurons where are sending axonal projections
where else-- tons and tons of cross
talk between the limbic system and the cortex.
OK.
So we now have this utterly undefined mass
of limbic system.
And we also have a tabula rasa there.
But-- here it is.
OK.
But what you've got is, of course,
subparts of the limbic system-- subparts out the wazoo.
There are people who spend their entire lives arguing about
whether this subsubnuclei of this part of the brain
should logically be considered as having seven
subparts or eight subparts.
Extremely complicated part of the brain.
And what we'll been looking at, here, is the circuitry.
The circuitry, and what each individual subregion
of the limbic system does.
All of this got sorted out in the 1930s
or so by a neurologist named James Papez.
And I think there remains enormous controversy over
whether his name is pronounced "papes" or "pap-ez."
But probably neither is correct.
But what you wound up getting, as a result of his work,
was the first person to begin to think
in a systematic way of, hey, all of these structures
in that old rhinencephalon part of the brain-- all
of these structures are sending projections to each other.
There seems to be some organized module of interconnected
function.
And it was around that time that people
began to be seeing what some of the effects were,
what some of the roles of these were-- behavior-- and suddenly
out comes the-- this is the emotional part of the brain.
And the circuitry that's since been delineated is known
as the "Papez circuit," or the "Pap-ez" circuit,
or the whatever the guy's name was circuit.
And we will see that shortly.
He was the first person to begin to see, just
on the level of connections, that this
is an area that seems to be doing
a lot of interrelated functions.
Quick definition.
What do we mean by "doing connections"?
Again, back to last week's introductory stuff,
a connection, a projection-- neurons
in this part of the brain are sending their axons
to that part of the brain and forming synapses there.
This area projects to that area.
So where are the projections?
Where are the connections to translate
this neuroanatomy concept into sort
of the most accessible level?
What parts of the brain are talking to this region?
And what parts of the brain is this region talking to?
Where are the axons coming from, and where are these neurons'
axons heading off to?
So, circuitry, in that regard.
So this is going to be an enormously complicated circuit.
But, at the end of the day, there
is one way to think about it, which is unifying,
which clarifies everything, which
is the thing that every single nucleus and subnucleus
and subsubnucleus in the limbic system-- the thing
that everything in the limbic system wants to do
is tell the hypothalamus what to do.
The entire limbic system is structured
around trying to influence hypothalamic function.
There's all those connections going to the cortex
and other areas, as well.
But, for a first pass, the way to conceptualize
the limbic system is, it tries to influence
what the hypothalamus is up to.
Why would that be interesting?
You know that, from last week.
Hypothalamus is the central hub for all
of that neuroendocrine stuff.
And thus the entire world of your brain
wanting to influence behavior and emotion in any sort
of endocrine context-- you're going
to have to be talking down here.
From earlier last week, hypothalamus
also playing a pivotal role in the autonomic nervous system
coming down the spine.
The whole world in which emotions
change how your body works is all about the limbic system
telling the hypothalamus what to do.
And thus what you see is, all the circuitry in here
is built around trying to influence
hypothalamic function.
In a certain way, as follows-- which will make perfect sense.
Which is, what every single area of the limbic system
wants to do is tell the hypothalamus what to do.
And in addition, the other thing that it really wants to do
is make sure no other part of the limbic system
is telling the hypothalamus what to do.
And thus you've got all sorts of areas
with means of stimulating regions of the hypothalamus
and inhibiting the activity of other limbic regions.
So you've got all these patterns, here,
of stimulating down there, inhibiting here--
all built around these different regions wanting to influence
hypothalamic function.
So amid it being a total, complete mess of circuitry,
one rule helps you begin to sort out the details.
Which is, OK, so you've got this area of the limbic system,
and it wants to influence the hypothalamus
at the end of the day.
How many synapses away is the hypothalamus?
How many neurons are intervening between this part
of the limbic system having something to say,
getting action potentials, and influencing something
[INAUDIBLE] hypothalamus?
This winds up being a pretty good rule of thumb,
in terms of looking at influence.
You send a projection straight into the hypothalamus--
in other words, you are one synapse away--
and you're going to be having a lot more control over what's
going on there than if you have to send a projection here,
which sends one there and there and bouncing around,
and 14 synapses later you're influencing
hypothalamic function.
How come?
Well, for one thing, one synapse away you're
going to be a lot faster.
And the other reason being, if there's 14 synapses in between,
everybody downstream of you is going
to have their own opinion about things
and it turns into a game of Telephone.
The most direct way of influencing
hypothalamic function is to have as few synapses
in your projection as possible.
And thus what you see is, most limbic regions
have a number of different ways of getting information down
to the hypothalamus, and they differ
in the number of synapses, and thus they
differ in their power.
And what we'll see is just one example, here.
Ah, we'll do that later.
OK.
So, lots of examples of that.
Just to give you a sense about something interesting in us,
in terms of this rule of how many synapses away.
So we've got this limbic part of the brain.
And back to that rhinencephalon business-- that, you know,
rodents are super olfactory and fish do whatever they do.
And, again, don't tell Fernald.
And all these other species have their--
And we're not a particularly olfactory species.
Here's something interesting.
Every single one of your sensory modalities
has to go through a minimum of three or four synapses
to first plunk down any influence
in the limbic system-- except for our olfactory systems,
which are one synapse away from the limbic system.
So even us, we are not terribly olfactory,
and we've got atrophied olfactory bulbs.
That's a rat.
Our olfactory system takes up less than 5% of our brain.
Nonetheless, olfaction is one synapse away
from the limbic system, telling you
something about that whole world,
that visual information can tell you
a lot about calculus equations.
Olfaction is the thing that flashes us back
to some emotional setting.
That's the reason for it.
Great example of this "counting the number of synapses"
strategies.
The fewer synapses, the more influence.
So, what are the structures of the limbic system?
First pass-- unfortunately, it is
going to make sense to learn all the details
of these different subregions, because you will be hearing
about all of them again.
You won't be hearing about them Monday night,
but you'll be hearing about them all in the next month or so.
And so learn the stuff.
OK.
So, what's going on in the limbic system?
What is inside here?
What we've got are the major structures
of the limbic system.
Sitting in there, you recognize the pituitary.
And thus sitting right on top of that is the hypothalamus.
And here we have all these other regions.
First off-- the amygdala.
The amygdala-- I have already mentioned
it a number of times in class.
We will hear details soon about what it does.
You've already heard some intimations of it.
So the amygdala is this cluster of neurons--
beginning to get another anatomical concept, here.
You've got nuclei-- clusters of neuronal cell bodies--
and you have projections-- areas of lots of axons.
So you will have a whole lot of cell bodies here
and sending their projections off there.
You will wind up seeing this as a densely packed area of cell
bodies.
Each one of these areas I will be mentioning now
are areas where the cell bodies are nuclei.
Interesting elaboration.
As you also learned last week, one
of the things that makes action potentials go really fast
is that business about myelin-- myelination.
These are very membranous wrappings-around.
Membrane-- very fatty, membrane lipid stuff,
which happens to be white in color.
Cell bodies tend to be grey in color.
And this is where the dichotomy comes
in brain science between grey-matter and white-matter
parts of the brain.
Grey matter are nuclei-- cell bodies, packed in there.
White matter are cables of axons going from one place
to another, wrapped in myelin.
So, just translating that into sort of terms
that we're familiar with.
OK, so, starting off-- the first nucleus of the limbic system,
the amygdala.
The amygdala-- if you study neuroanatomy,
most of these places come with some terms
derived from Latin or Greek or something or other.
And the amygdala-- "amygdala" means "almond."
It means "almond."
A number of years ago, I reported
that it means "peach pit," and that turned out to be wrong.
And I was also wrong as to whether it was Greek or Latin.
And I probably should have written
that down from two years ago.
But, from some stupid old classic language,
this means "almond."
And it looks like an almond.
OK.
Next, we have, in front of it, the hippocampus.
Hippocampus, which we will hear lots about, as well.
And you will see the hippocampus is
a big structure spanning over there relevant to its function.
"Hippocampus," Latin for "seahorse."
But if you look at the hippocampus,
it doesn't look at all like a seahorse,
suggesting neuroanatomists don't go out
to the beach anywhere near as often as would be a good idea.
It actually looks like a jelly roll.
But people who spoke Latin didn't know about jelly rolls,
and thus they had to-- seahorses.
So you've got the hippocampus, here.
We will shortly be seeing how these two communicate
with each other-- where the axons are
going between these nuclei.
Next, an area called the "septum."
And there's a number of septums in the body.
"Septum" is a term for a midline structure.
You have a septum separating the two nostrilly parts
of your nose.
The center of the four chambers of your heart is a septum.
"Septum," here, is a structure that's
right at the midbrain-- at the midline of the brain.
Then we have, just tucked behind the hippocampus,
something called the "mammillary bodies."
Yeah, you gotta know these terms.
You will eventually be so, so grateful
for having all this stupid terminology under your belt.
It will make the rest of your life far, far richer.
OK.
So you've got mammillary body here.
Sitting on top of that is a remarkable structure that you
probably could have intuited was there,
because you know about the hypothalamus.
"Hypothalamus"-- what does that mean?
It means it's the thing that's under the thalamus.
I bet you there's something a little bit north of there
called the thalamus.
And here it is.
Which is possibly also known as the "hypersuprahypothalamus,"
but instead it's known as the "thalamus."
And we will see some stuff that it does.
Next are two very interesting areas,
which we will hear tons about in lectures to come--
in particular the lectures on depression-- a region called
the "ventral tegmental area" and a region called the "nucleus
accumbens."
Every one of these is in the handouts.
Don't freak out about trying to get down the terms,
at this point.
Just at least get the abbreviations.
Here are the major players in the limbic system--
with one addition.
And this is one that bedeviled the field for a long time
and reflected a very, very great piece of insight.
A neuroanatomist back-- who sort of was in his prime
in the latter part of the last century--
a guy named Walle Nauta, a Dutch guy
who was arguably the best neuroanatomist of the last half
of the 20th century.
And in the 1950s, studying neural connectiveness,
what he came up with was a totally nutty idea.
Because, at that point, we were about 20-- "we"--
were about 10, 20 years into the limbic concept.
These are subcortical areas involved in emotion,
and they all send projections to each other.
And Nauta, based on looking at the anatomy-- what
parts of the brain were sending projections where, what parts
were getting projections from where-- Nauta said,
one part of the cortex should actually be classified
as part of the limbic system.
Oh, this was heresy!
He was driven out of the neuroanatomy club.
And he was insisting that this made sense, anatomically,
and predicted it would make sense, eventually,
functionally.
And he was totally right.
The most interesting area of the cortex-- a region
called the "frontal cortex."
Also known as the "prefrontal cortex."
An obviously real distinction there.
We will ignore that distinction.
An area-- the frontal cortex, including a subarea
called the "anterior cingulate."
This is a part of the cortex which
is intimately interconnected with all
these subcortical regions.
It is arguably the cortical component of the limbic system.
Why is that the case?
We will see, amid lots of cortex [INAUDIBLE] stuff,
like, telling you, is it here that you were just stimulated,
or was it there?
Did somebody just play an A or an A flat?
Which limb do I want to move right now?
All sorts of nuts-and-bolts stuff.
How do I do long division?
All those things.
The frontal cortex has this world of utterly un-cortex-like
things that it's interested in.
Emotional regulation, impulse control, long-term planning,
gratification postponement.
It is, without question, the most interesting part
of the brain.
And I say that as someone who's just spent,
like, the last 30 years of my life
just obsessing over the hippocampus, and I was wrong.
I mean, the hippocampus has done well by me.
I have been faithful to it.
But nonetheless it has struck me, more and more,
that this is where I should have been sitting, because this
is oh so much more interesting part of the brain
than some dumb old area that remembers stuff for you.
Frontal cortex is what makes us most definedly human.
It is proportionately larger in humans
than in any other species.
It is the most recently evolved.
Something that we will hear about in coming weeks
is, it's the last part of the brain to fully mature.
Most of you in here do not yet have
a frontal cortex which is fully online-- which
is an amazing thing.
Frontal cortex isn't fully myelinated
until in your mid-20s, on the average.
This is not-- oh, you were born with all
these neural connections.
This is a part of the brain that does impulse control for you.
And it is not working yet very well, in most of you guys,
for a while to come.
I don't know what this explains, but it no doubt
explains a great deal.
This is an incredibly interesting part
of the brain which has nothing to do with--
oh, let's turn that sensory information
into a three-dimensional map, and I could
recognize whose face it is.
And this instead is a cortical area utterly intertwined
with what's going on in the limbic system.
One interesting measure of it, which
is looking at this frontal part of the cortical brain.
And an interesting measure, worked on by a guy
named Ian Dunbar some years ago, looking at,
by now, about 150 different primate species.
And, in each one, asking, what percentage of the brain
is made up by this prefrontal cortex?
How much of the brain is devoted to it?
And what he showed, across 150 different primate species--
the single best predictor of how big the frontal cortex was
going to be was, how large is the average social group
for this species?
In other words, you sitting around
in some species where you've got to keep track
of three other people in there, or you live in a species
where there's 150 individuals in your troop.
And the latter species is going to have proportionally
a far bigger frontal cortex.
What this suggests, on a certain level,
is, this utterly defining part of the brain
evolved for gossip and social relations
and appropriate behavior and social intelligence
and all sorts of stuff like that.
Truly interesting part of the brain,
utterly intertwined with the traditional limbic regions.
So this Nauta guy was completely correct.
OK.
So, now adding in the next layer of miserable
factoids you need to have, which will show the same principles
I've been talking about.
Which is how these areas connect with each other.
At this point, it has basically been
shown that every limbic region projects to-- sends axons
to-- some other limbic region.
I'm just going to put in some of the main pathways, here.
First one, called the "amygdalofugal pathway,"
which carries information back and forth between the amygdala
and hippocampus.
Amygdaloid neurons projecting to the hippocampus,
hippocampal neurons projecting back.
And, as we will see, an awful lot
of what the amygdala is involved with-- I think
I've mentioned already-- fear, anxiety,
learning to be afraid of particular stimuli.
A lot of what the hippocampus does
is help you remember stuff.
This connection between them is critical
when you are learning that every time the guy-- the Russian guy
with the beard-- puts the light on,
you're going to get a shock, and then
you're going to have to salivate when he tells you there's
food coming.
What the amygdala is doing there is hijacking the hippocampus
at that time to have hippocampus do some memory formation
for you about a fearful stimulus.
So, interconnections there that are extremely important.
Next we've got hippocampus needing to talk to the septum.
And it does so with a series of projections-- bidirectional,
again-- called the "fimbria fornix." "Fornix"--
here's showing just how much fun neuroanatomy can be. "Fornix"
is from Latin or Greek or whatever for "arch,"
and apparently it comes from referring to the Roman
Colosseum.
And supposedly this is the origins of another word.
That, during classical Roman times,
this is where prostitutes would be.
So people who would say they were going off there
would be going off to the arches-- off to fornicate.
That's the origins of that.
So isn't this such a cool subject?
So here we've got the fornix, there, completing this arch.
Hippocampus talking to septum.
Septum then sending a huge projection,
coming down to the hypothalamus, back
on to the mammillary bodies.
And projections going back this way, as well.
A major, major limbic pathway called the "medial forebrain
bundle."
OK.
Just to make things more complicated,
now, we now have another projection
from the amygdala that goes straight to the hypothalamus.
And this is a total pain.
This is a pathway called the "stria terminalis."
And, by all logic, what it should do
is go from here to there.
No, that's not what it does.
Here's what the stria terminalis does.
It starts in the amygdala, and it
goes looping just on the outside of the hippocampus,
around this way, and lands back there.
What's up with that?
That is ridiculous.
What you see, here, is a principle
about a lot of this neurobiological wiring
stuff, which is, you get totally nutty, inefficient,
you know, going out through left field projections.
How did that happen?
What that tells you is, at some point, embryologically,
these two structures were not so close to each other.
And part of the embryonic development
involved flipping over like this.
And suddenly the amygdala is right next door,
long after it made the most efficient possible connection
by way of this.
And now you've got this completely nutty way
to get around there.
So often you see really inefficient pieces
of wiring, here, telling you something
about embryonic development.
Some of the time, you also see nutty pieces of wiring
telling you something about the evolutionary history
of this nervous system.
Here's one example-- and this is one outside
of the limbic system but great demonstration of this,
having to do with some motor systems in the brain.
OK.
You're here, and you decide what you would like
to do is bend this one finger.
What would be the logical thing?
Some part of the cortex up here involved in motor control
that we're not interested in should
send a message down to this finger saying "bend."
No.
That's not what happens.
One part of this motor system called
the "pyramidal nervous system" sends a message to all five
of your fingers saying "do this."
Meanwhile, there's another motor system called
the "extrapyramidal system" that quickly sends down a signal
and says, if you happen to hear the pyramidal system tell
fingers 1, 3, 4, and 5 to bend, don't pay attention to it.
And suddenly you've got this going on.
Like-- what is this-- a committee
that came up with this?
This is totally crazy, inefficient wiring--
until you think about the evolution of the system.
As follows, there's not a whole lot of species out there
that have a need, in terms of reproductive success,
to play trills on the piano.
There's not a whole lot of species
that have to do independent movement of fingers.
The basic wiring of this motor system
is one of this crude, pyramidal system of just sending messages
down the line, there.
Extend claws, retract-- all that sort of thing.
And along come primates and raccoons and a few other things
that suddenly get it into their heads
to move fingers independently.
So you've got a choice, at that point.
You can either renovate the entire pyramidal system
and rip it out and rewire so that each finger is controlled
independently.
And that's never going to work, because, you know,
the contractor doesn't show up, and it's been a million years.
Or what you do is, you have to come up
with a second, newer system that's superimposed on top.
Totally ass-backwards, inefficient way
of doing-- what does that tell you?
The extrapyramidal system is more recently evolved.
It is more of a primate system.
And that's where you get the fine control.
What you often see is bits of really clunky wiring
and regulation-- tells you things about embryonic life,
and it tells you about evolution.
Back to this classic quote, which
is "Evolution is not an inventor,
evolution is a tinkerer."
It is just playing with what's already there
and trying to come up with something better.
That was the idea from lectures ago.
Which, all things considered, squid
do not swim anywhere near as fast as barracuda.
But for something that used to be a barnacle,
they're pretty good swimmers.
You have to realize where things started
and where the adaptations came from.
OK.
So, more wiring.
And now we've got the mammillary bodies talking to the thalamus.
The mammillothalamic tract.
And then you've got the thalamus talking bidirectionally
with the frontal cortex.
So you begin to see the starts, here,
of kind of a looping circuit, and going bidirectionally--
all of that.
Two additional areas-- this ventral tegmental area
and this nucleus accumbens.
Ventral tegmentum sends a lot of information here,
and from on there it goes to every single place.
And we will eventually see great relevance
of that bidirectionally.
OK.
So, horrible circuitry.
What you should already see is one example
of what I was telling you about, before-- counting
number of synapses.
So you're the amygdala, and you want
to tell the hypothalamus what to do.
You've got a choice.
You can do it by way of this stria terminalis thing, which
is one synapse away.
Or you could do it by talking to the hippocampus, which
talks to the septum, which talks to the hypothalamus.
Where's the most important stuff coming out of the amygdala
to the hypothalamus?
By way of this stria terminalis.
What's this communication about?
A lot of the time, it's the amygdala
trying to get the hippocampus to shut up so the amygdala can
dominate hypothalamic events.
That begins to show this principle of,
how many synapses away?
So we have all of this incredible wiring, here.
And, again, every single one of these,
there's other minor ones there, as well,
and they all interconnect with each other.
But these are some of the major ones.
Does this make sense?
How about now?
[LAUGHTER]
OK.
So, that's the limbic system, in terms of basic wiring.
So what everyone needs to do now is
spend the next five minutes filling in what
those abbreviations were for.
And then we will finally get past this stupid A sends to B
and begin to look at function.
OK, so, five minutes.
OK, so, pushing on.
Good question that just came up, relevant to Biocore people.
So what I just said-- that business
about the olfactory system is one synapse away
from the limbic system-- isn't it hopefully amazing?
Remember Biocore stuff-- that business-- the visual cortex,
the first layer that does dots, the second layer
does lines, at certain angles-- that's
where you're getting all the synapses coming
in which delay you from getting information into there.
Auditory system has the same multilayer processing.
Tactile-- all of those are like that, except for olfaction.
That drops its first signaling right off into the amygdala.
So very, very different circuitry.
OK.
So, now, finally getting to function.
So how do you figure out the function of the limbic system?
A bunch of different techniques-- bunch
of different experimental techniques.
First, you have the greatest thing
that has been most helpful in all
of the history of neuroscience in understanding
how different parts of the brain work, which is endless warfare.
Because what that gives you are people
who have had parts of their brain blown out of the water,
there.
You have-- nice jargon-- missile wounds.
So, after every big, good, fun, energetic war,
all sorts of neuroanatomists get their careers,
like, jump-started for years afterward,
studying people who have had parts of the brain lesioned,
damaged, destroyed by circumstances like that.
But, you know, any old time, neuroanatomists
are delighted to get ahold of somebody who's
had a brain region damaged.
There's one guy, in fact-- everybody has heard of HM,
I suspect.
Anybody not heard of HM?
OK.
So you've all heard of HM.
There's another guy-- NA.
NA his septum taken out.
And what happened to NA?
All that it ever says in the literature
was that he was at a wedding and his septum was destroyed
by a miniature fencing foil.
[LAUGHTER]
That's it!
That's the literature on what happened to NA.
So NA, you know, was a draft dodger
in endless different wars, and then he
gets done in by his, like, sister-in-law's
wedding kind of thing.
But lesions-- lesions are critical.
So human studies, where you have had accidental damage
to brain regions.
Or the rare, horrifying world where
there was damage done to human brains intentionally.
Back to class 1-- the frontal-lobotomy business.
Just to clarify-- frontal lobotomies,
in its classic form, was not lesioning
the prefrontal cortex.
It was just putting a big-ol' cut
somewhere through there that took out limbic structures.
Given the fact that most frontal lobotomies were being done,
I kid you not, with an ice axe-- that
was the tool of choice for the neurosurgeons--
this was not a very precise surgical technique.
But it was taking out all sorts of limbic structures.
So the rare world of intentional lesions in humans,
HM being the rare version of that, where it was done
for a valid clinical reason.
Much more often in the lesion world
is taking experimental animals, where you go in
and you selectively destroy some region.
And the strategy, whether in humans or animals,
is absolutely obvious, which is, OK,
if we destroy this part of the brain, what doesn't work right
anymore?
Ooh, we've just found out something about what
that part of the brain does.
Next strategy-- classic one.
Now, instead of lesioning a brain region,
you put down an electrode where you stimulate that region.
You artificially generate action potentials there.
This is a brain region that gets projections from here,
and this region is not saying anything whatsoever.
There are no activity here to send action potentials there.
Nothing's happening.
And what you're doing instead is,
by sticking an electrode in there and stimulating,
you are simulating an input, there.
Stimulate, and now see what happens.
Ooh, we've just learned something
about that part of the brain.
Rarely done with humans, except for epileptics
with severe types of intractable epilepsy
where a certain type of neurosurgery
is done to correct it.
And it's often quite effective.
On the way down, the electrodes, going down-- often,
the neurosurgeons stimulate on the way down,
to be assured that they're in the right place.
OK.
Next version.
Now, instead, you put down an electrode, and that one's
a recording electrode.
What that one is telling you is-- so you're down in here--
when are these neurons getting electrically excited?
Or, putting it in here, when are action potentials pulsing
through this part of the brain, picking up what's going on?
And what really winds up being fancy
are people who, for example, can put a stimulating electrode
down here and a recording electrode
there-- that sort of thing.
There's a whole world of incredibly adept people
who could record from one single neuron at a time.
Or how's about this?
Back to those neurotransmitter receptors
coupled to an ion channel, an ion channel that opens up,
and stuff goes in or out.
There is a technique called "patch clamping,"
where people can record from one single ion channel at a time.
Which is just madness, that people could do this.
But, in terms of the resolution, all of these techniques
artificially get neurons excited, electrically.
See what happens next.
Put in a recording device to tell you what's happening.
And thus you begin to do things like, ooh,
every time I do this with my hand,
these neurons get action potentials.
We've just learned something pertinent, there.
What else?
Another realm of techniques you've already heard about,
which is this plain old, boring anatomy.
Which part of the brain sends axons
to this part of the brain?
How many synapses away?
All of the means of deriving information
that we heard about before.
So that's the whole world of just looking at the circuitry,
telling you about function from that.
Then, of course, there's a whole world of biochemical stuff.
You are measuring levels of things.
You are measuring levels of neurotransmitters.
Molecular biology-- seeing where different genes
are being expressed.
If you see genes that are only expressed
in this part of the limbic system,
under some circumstance, you've just learned something
about its function.
All that sort of thing.
Finally, a world where you could do really interesting,
trendy stuff with humans, in terms of seeing what's
up in the limbic system.
Where what you do is, you can image brain regions.
And this is now a whole world of-- instead
of sitting around, waiting for somebody to die,
and slice their brain up afterward,
instead you could do imaging-- CAT scans, CT Scans, MRI--
where you see the areas of different parts in the brain--
how big or small they are.
You can look at the metabolic rate
in certain areas of the brain.
Which is sort of the equivalent of recording.
Stick in an electrode, and you can
tell what's happening here by when
there's electrical excitation.
Use functional brain imaging, and you
can tell what's happening here by,
when suddenly there's more oxygen or glucose being
consumed, here--
Same sort of information.
With the imaging, though, you're getting
a picture of the entire brain all at once.
And one of the cool things that's
come out of those studies is showing
that some regions of the brain, particularly the limbic system,
will change their size over time.
One example which I think we've heard
about already, which is that the amygdala gets bigger
in people with posttraumatic stress disorder.
Severe, severe traumatic history, and this part
of the brain expands.
People with PTSD-- amygdalas are larger.
You look at the metabolic rate in the amygdala.
People with PTSD, it is more metabolically reactive
than other areas of the brain or than in people
who don't have PTSD.
So that's just told you something interesting.
Nice cellular basis of that.
Periods of severe stress cause neurons
in the amygdala to grow more dendritic processes.
That's probably why the amygdala gets bigger.
So that's the sort of thing that gets picked up
on humans, with brain imaging.
Another version, over in the hippocampus,
just as pertinent to some of the stuff we will hear about.
People with long-term, major depression.
Their hippocampus gets smaller.
Their hippocampus atrophies a bit.
And the same sort of information being picked up.
You see an area of the brain that
is plastic enough, that is malleable enough, that its size
will change in response to certain types of experiences
or emotional states.
You just learned something about what that part of the brain
does.
So that winds up being extremely informative,
when there's differences in the size of different brain
regions, in response to experience.
OK.
So that's generally the set of tools
that are available to people trying to figure out what's
going on in the limbic system.
And all of these tools come with some important limitations.
These are limitations if what you're trying to do
is figure out what this part of the spinal column
does instead of that part, because you
need to figure out-- all sorts of caveats in there.
If that's hard, it is a gazillion times harder
to use some of these techniques to make
sense of emotion and emotional memories and things
of that sort.
What are some of the difficulties
in interpreting data from all the results we just
heard about?
Here is one problem.
OK.
Every day, unbeknownst to you guys,
there are two to three dozen huge tractor-trailer
trucks that start at dawn from Gilroy
and bring us our garlic that is used in all of the dorm dining
rooms.
Every single morning, that happens.
Thousands of pounds that are consumed in the dorm.
And you are trying to understand where
in California is the garlic-generating center,
the garlic nucleus.
And what you've been selectively doing
is carpet-bombing certain areas in Northern California.
And, as a result of a direct hit on 101,
no more garlic shows up at Leland Stanford Junior
University.
So what have you just concluded?
101, somewhere right around Laser Quest,
is exactly where the center is for producing garlic
in Northern California.
And that's the only plausible scientific conclusion
you can reach.
What we have here is the problem of centers
versus fibers of passage.
Have you just, in a lesion study,
found out something about a region?
You've destroyed it, and something
doesn't work normally.
Is that because you've taken out the neurons, the cell bodies,
in the true center?
Or have you inadvertently cut a fiber passage?
Have you blown out 101--
And endless mistakes made over the years.
Early on in neuroanatomy, people failing
to distinguish between lesions of nuclei
versus lesions of pathways.
What really winds up being hard is
when you have nuclei with cell bodies and, at the same time,
fibers passing through from someplace else.
That's what this medial forebrain bundle is about.
Cell nuclei all over the place, but,
at the same time, fibers passing through.
When you do a lesion in a place like that,
you can't tell whether it's the cell bodies, the nucleus
aspects, the center that you're taking out,
or whether you have just taken out a fiber of passage.
Enormously difficult stuff to do.
OK.
So that's one constraint.
Once you get through that, and you've figured out,
ooh, this really is the center-- this really
is the cell bodies, rather than just the axons--
then you deal with this issue of,
what does a "center" mean in the brain?
Yeah, this may be the center-- the part
of the brain that moves this finger instead of this one.
That may be a pertinent concept.
Ooh-- this is the center of the brain for feeling depressed
amid a bittersweet gratitude for the unexpected pleasures
of life, which are felt in a poignant context,
making you smell memories of the kindergarten classroom
you were in.
Oh!
That's the center of the limbic system for that.
By the time you're getting to a part of the brain that's
doing all this emotional stuff, intermixed
with sensory information, intermixed with memories,
even the concept of, oh, this is the part of the brain that
does fear for you, this is the part of the brain that
does aggression-- as we'll see, these
are some pretty flimsy concepts.
OK.
More qualifiers.
The next thing you need to be, in order
to be a good neuroanatomist and make use of the information
from these techniques, is to also be an ethologist.
We already heard a version of that.
The rhinencephalon-- that's what's
going on a species that's all about olfaction.
You can't understand the wiring going to the limbic system
unless you have interviewed an animal in its own language.
Classic need for ethology.
OK, so here would be another demonstration.
You have found a part of the brain which
you think is interesting.
It's a limbic structure.
Nobody quite knows what it does.
And you have now just stuck a stimulating electrode down
in there.
And the strategy is, you're going
to mildly stimulate there, and you see
what happens in the organism.
So your first study subject is a lion,
and you've stuck your stimulating electrode down
in there.
And you mildly stimulate this part of the brain.
And what the lion does is it does this.
It extends its claws.
Now your next subject is a human.
So you sit down, you plunk down your stimulating electrode,
and you stimulate mildly in that same part of the brain.
And the human says "Shit."
So what part of the brain have we just found, here?
We have found a part of the brain that
plays a role in expressing a certain degree of irritation.
And if you are a lion, you're sort
of extending your claws, there.
You probably want to stop messing with me,
because look what I'm doing right now,
and look how sharp they are.
With the human, another ver-- you've
got to know your species.
Another example of this.
So here's a part of the brain, and you're
wondering what's up with this.
You do the same strategy.
You stick in the stimulating electrodes.
And you do this to a rat.
And what she does is proceed to run around her cage like crazy
and take pieces of newspaper, rip into little pieces,
and stuff them in the corner.
OK, that's an interesting center of the brain.
Then you do the exact same thing to a rhesus monkey.
And what she does is grab any sort of cylindrical object
around and hold it in her arms, by her nipples.
Oh-- maternal behavior.
First case, you got a rat making a nest.
Second case, you were stimulating nursing behavior.
Ah!
OK, you've got to translate it into what
it looks like in the species.
And here's one domain where that went utterly, utterly wrong.
Part of the hypothalamus which people used to think
had everything to do with aggression.
Because, for example, here you would
take a stimulating electrode in a rat.
And you put a mouse in the same cage as the rat.
And you stimulate that part of the brain of the rat.
And the rat leaps on the mouse, trying to rip it to shreds.
Now you take a human, and you stimulate
that same part of the brain.
And they leap up and run over to the cereal box and rip it open
and start eating.
What's up with-- oh!
Rats eat mice.
That's what the-- that was not a rat being angry,
that was a rat getting something to snack on.
And you had to recognize the difference between what
does aggression look like in that species versus what
does food acquisition.
And if it's a predatory species, it
could pass for looking mighty aggressive and not actually be.
A whole generation of people, thinking
they were understanding the neurobiology of aggression,
inadvertently made this mistake and wound up
studying the neurobiology of predatory behavior.
So you gotta know your species.
Ethological principles.
Next, you've got to know your individual.
So here, now you've got two lions,
and you stick in your stimulating electrode
into the first one.
That same region, again.
And you stimulate, and he does the same deal again.
Or suppose you even stimulate it more,
and he does this a bunch of times,
and then he roars savagely.
Meanwhile, you stimulate the same area in the second lion
and nothing happens at all.
You take two baboons.
You stimulate that region in the first one,
and he gives this big threat yawn, displaying his canines.
You stimulate it in the second individual,
and nothing changes in his behavior.
What's the difference?
Any speculations?
Dominance.
Yes!
Dominance!
Here, in the second case-- in the first case,
you're doing it to a dominant individual.
And they do their fixed action pattern
for their species of expressing aggression,
dominance, whatever.
But you do it to some subordinate guy,
and that's not part of his repertoire right now.
And even though that's the part of the brain that "does"
that behavior, it is tightly inhibited in that individual,
because that's not an individual who
goes around displaying his canines
to a whole lot of his buddies.
You have to know the individual, as well.
So, given all of those constraints,
that tells you, if you're going to understand what's
up with this part of the brain, and the difference
between fibers and nuclei, and don't
get overly impressed with the notion of centers of function.
But you gotta do the ethology stuff.
Here, more than any time that we've seen,
you gotta understand the species and the individual
that you are interviewing with your electrodes.
OK.
So, given all of that, what do some of the limbic system
structures do?
This is a first, insanely simplifying pass,
because every one of these areas you're going
to hear about oh so much more.
But a very first pass.
And you notice, as part of the first pass
I'm going to be violating the caveat that I just
gave two minutes ago, in that, on this first pass, here,
I'm going to be presenting these as the center.
This is the part of the brain that does this.
We're going to see how totally wrong that is.
Nonetheless, on a first pass.
Amygdala.
Amygdala is centrally involved in fear and anxiety.
You know this already.
Of tremendous significance, telling us
something about why this world is such a messed up place,
the amygdala also plays a central role in aggression.
Not messed up just because, ooh, this is the part of the brain
that generates aggression, but what it tells you is,
you cannot understand the neurobiology of being violent
without understanding the neurobiology of being afraid
and being anxious.
And the fact that this is the same part of the brain
that "does" both of those functions,
suggesting on a certain neurobiological level
in a world in which no neurons need be afraid,
you're not going to be generating
a whole lot of aggression.
Also very interestingly, what we will hear about
is, the amygdala also plays a role in male sexual motivation.
What's that doing, going through the amygdala?
Not sure whatsoever, but what that
may begin to explain is the subset of the individuals who
will confuse aspects of aggressive behavior
and sexual behavior in all sorts of pathological ways.
First pass of what the amygdala is about.
Meanwhile, next door we've got-- OK, not "next door,"
but two synapses away-- we've got the septum.
Showing a first important example
of this theme in the limbic system,
amygdala mediates aggression.
Caveats, all of that, we got the fine print now.
The septum inhibits aggression.
It does exactly the opposite, beginning
to present a theme throughout the limbic system
of different subareas working in opposition.
What would you be logically betting the farm on right now?
When the amygdala is activated, it tries to silence the septum.
When the septum is activated, it tries to silence the amygdala.
Cross-inhibitory projections.
So what would these things look like?
You destroy the amygdala of an animal,
you never get aggressive behavior again.
You record from it when it's smelling some scary rival.
The amygdala activates, you stimulate,
and it does an aggressive behavior.
You could begin to see how you figure this out.
Next, hippocampus.
Hippocampus, famous for being involved
in learning and memory.
Important for us, as well, hippocampus
plays a role in turning off the stress response.
You remember that negative-feedback stuff
from two days ago.
Every endocrine system, there's got
to be a part of the brain that measures
the hormone in the bloodstream to figure out what should
the hypothalamus be doing.
The hippocampus measures the levels of glucocorticoids.
Why should a part of the brain that does memory
be so intertwined with stress?
Very logical in two ways.
Number 1, here's a stressful, horrifying, scary circumstance.
Remember what you did to get out of this, if you
do manage to get out of this.
File this away very, very emphatically.
Second thing that it's good for is, stressful circumstance
coming up.
What did I do last time to get out of this circumstance?
So, an intertwining between a memory part of the brain
and a relationship with stress hormone regulation.
Next, mammillary bodies.
Has aspects relevant to maternal behavior.
And that's not why it was called the mammillary bodies,
but they're shaped by, like, mammary glands.
If you, once again, don't spend a whole lot of time
or look too much at seahorses, but the mammillary bodies.
Next, prefrontal cortex.
You've heard all about, and we are
going to hear tons more about it,
because it is incredibly interesting, in terms
of maturation and learning appropriate sexual behavior,
learning not how to be aggressive
but when to be aggressive.
The notion that there is a problem
with this part, the anterior cingulate, in people
with clinical depression.
Anterior cingulate.
I think I may have referred to this already.
Sit somebody down, poke their finger with a needle,
and areas here are going to light up in spinal pathways,
telling you it was this finger and not
that one and areas making you breathe faster and all of that.
And, in addition, the anterior cingulate is going to activate.
Take somebody now and have them watch their loved one get
their finger poked with a needle,
and nothing's happening down here.
But the anterior cingulate activates.
It's doing something along the lines of empathy
and feeling somebody else's pain.
And suddenly it becomes real interesting
that there's stuff going wrong in it in clinical depression.
Easily translated into, that that
is a disease of pathological hypersensitivity to the pains
of life and the world.
OK, so, frontal cortex.
Finally, lurking around in here, the ventral tegmental area
and the nucleus accumbens.
Really pertinent to depression, as well.
This is the part of the brain that
has all the neurons that release dopamine,
having to do with pleasure.
This is the part of the brain that cocaine works on--
that, indirectly, all addictive drugs work on.
This is the part-- stimulates dopamine release here,
stimulates dopamine release at all the interesting places--
frontal cortex, amygdala, hippocampus--
central to understanding everything
about appetitive behavior-- behavior driven
by an appetite for something.
That tells us an elaboration we'll
be learning about, in terms of what the dopamine system, here,
does.
People used to think this is the system
that activates when you are feeling pleasure.
Turns out it does something much more interesting.
This is the part of the brain that activates when you're
anticipating feeling pleasure.
It's not about getting the reward.
It's about anticipating that you will get a reward.
And what it's most about is not only
anticipating that you may get a reward
but powering the behavior you need to do in order
to get the reward.
Standard paradigm showing this-- you take
a monkey that's been trained.
Every time a light comes on, at that point if it presses
a lever 10 times, five-second delay and out comes some food.
That reward system.
Initially, the very first time it
stumbles into just happening to hit this out of boredom
10 times and out comes some food.
Ooh, up go dopamine levels when the food comes out.
But pretty soon, what you get instead,
the dopamine levels go up when the light first comes on.
This is not, ooh, I just got some pleasurable food,
this is, I know this one.
I'm on top of this.
I'm all over this one.
This one's easy.
This is one of those 10-lever-press deals.
This is going to be great.
I got this under control.
Elevated dopamine, you go hit the lever
and along comes the food.
Now, instead, you flash on the signal,
telling you we're entering one of those "press the lever 10
times, you get food" sessions.
You turn that on, and you block the rise in dopamine.
And the animal doesn't press the lever.
What this pathway is about is giving you
the energy, the motivation, the depolarization
of neurons for carrying out the pursuit of pleasure.
And that's really informative, as we'll see.
Because stimulating the pursuit of pleasure
is far more of an addictive process than the pleasure
itself, in terms of making sense of some of the circuitry.
OK.
So all of this eventually plunks us down into the hypothalamus.
The hypothalamus has a gazillion subareas,
all these separate little nuclei that
have a variety of functions, all of which
have boring, vegetative, just keeping track
of body temperature type functions, all of which
are also profoundly affected by the whole world of emotion
and thought and memory.
First area.
Ventromedial hypothalamus.
We're going to hear tons about that, starting next week,
along with a cognate area, the medial preoptic area.
These terms will become familiar.
Do not freak out.
These areas are very pertinent to sexual behavior.
And what we will see is that one of them
is more involved in male sexual behavior,
one more in female sexual behavior, on the average.
There are gender differences in the size of these areas.
There is one landmark study that everybody learned about,
about 15 years ago, showing that there's
a difference in the size of one of these regions,
depending on your sexual orientation.
There is an amazing study that was
shown that people who are transgender
have differences in the size of some of these regions
as a function not of what their sexual phenotype is
but of what they've always said "I have always felt like a"
whatever.
They have the region the size of the "what I always
felt like I was" rather than what they actually
are, bringing in this possibility
that what transgender is about is not somebody thinking
that they have the wrong sex, but it's somebody
who's gotten the wrong body.
So these areas, we're going to hear lots about next week.
Next region-- SCN-- suprachiasmatic nucleus.
And once Julie Andrews says that as loud and fast as possible.
The suprachiasmatic nucleus is about circadian rhythms.
We're mostly going to ignore that.
And anybody who has anything to do with Craig Heller's lab,
don't tell him that I said that, either.
But it's like-- stupid circadian rhythms in fish,
sort of doing two of my colleagues at once.
Next-- moving on.
Another part of the hypothalamus.
PVN-- paraventricular nucleus.
What's made in there?
CRH.
That's the part of the brain that
initiates the backbone of the stress response.
And what areas are sending projections to it?
Everything.
Everything ranging from pathways that tell you that you've just
burned your toe, to pathways telling you
are very, very hungry, to pathways telling you
that you've just smelled a terrifying territorial rival,
to pathways telling you you have just thought about, oh my god,
only four days till the midterm, or whatever it is.
By the time you get to species that
can be stressed by very abstract cognitive states
by thinking about the suffering of somebody
on the other side of the planet, what do we
know about the neuroanatomy?
PVN is getting projections from all over the place.
Next, arcuate nucleus.
Arcuate nucleus is the bottom of the hypothalamic funnel.
That's the part where all of the hypothalamic hormones
come out and get into the circulatory system there.
There's actually another area on top of that.
I will not mention it, but that's its function.
Lateral hypothalamus has something to do with hunger.
And that's the area that people wasted years
on thinking they were studying aggression
when they were instead studying predatory behavior.
Lateral hypothalamus has to do with hunger.
Boring version of it, it does things
like measure your blood glucose levels
and your insulin levels-- all sorts of logical things.
Really interesting level, evidence
that the lateral hypothalamus has
something to do with hungers in the broader sense.
Hungers for types of information.
Hungers for other rewards other than food.
It's an area having to do with hunger.
OK.
So this very, very fast pass here over all of it.
One additional component to think about,
which is, everything I've just said
has been oriented around all this limbic-system stuff, built
around eventually influencing the hypothalamus
and thus eventually influencing the entire world of hormones
or of the autonomic nervous system.
This is this unidirectional picture.
Stuff starts in the brain, and you have
outcomes throughout the body.
What is just as important is, all the ways
in which stuff going on in the body
will influence limbic function, completing this circle.
And an awful lot of that information
is the autonomic nervous system not going in this direction
but going in this direction.
Now what this brings up is a classic theory
that's been in psychology since around 1900
or so called the James-Lange theory of emotion,
named for William James and Lange-- whoever that was.
That may have been his puppy.
But the James-Lange theory of emotion goes as follows.
Here's how you feel an emotion.
It is not the case that your brain decides
it's feeling an emotion based on sensory information coming in,
memory, whatever.
The brain decides it's feeling an emotion and tells the body,
let's speed up the heart, let's breathe faster,
let's sweat-- whatever it is.
That's not how emotion works.
Here's how emotion works.
Stimulus comes into your brain, and before you consciously
process it your body is already responding--
with heart rate, with blood pressure,
with pupillary contractions-- whatever.
How do you figure out what emotion you are feeling?
You are getting information back from the periphery,
telling you what's going on down there.
In other words, how do you figure out you're excited?
Whoa!
If I'm suddenly breathing real fast,
and my heart's beating fast, it must
be because I feel ex-- oh, I feel excited now.
Ridiculous.
Totally absurd way in which you could process stuff.
Completely inefficient.
And over the years, after decades
of being wildly discredited, more and more evidence
that that is some of how emotion is based-- your brain being
influenced by your bodily state to decide what
emotions it's feeling.
A number of examples.
First one.
Ones of those hormones that just has "emotion" written
all over it-- adrenaline.
Adrenaline, epinephrine.
Epinephrine, associated with arousal
of the sympathetic nervous system.
So what happens when you dump some epinephrine
into the nervous system?
What does it do to the brain?
What does it do to the limbic system?
What does it do to the sort of behaviors influenced by it?
And, greatest demonstration-- this was a classic study
in the '60s-- guy named Stanley Schachter doing
a study that you could not do again on humans,
with current rules.
But here's what he did.
He gave people epinephrine, adrenaline,
without them knowing it.
OK, less paperwork in those days.
But here's what the one version of the classic experiment was.
Somebody comes in, and they believe
what they're doing is some study of, you take this vitamin
and does it change the way you do Sudoku or something.
Like, that was just the teaser.
That was the distracter.
You've taken this pill which actually contained
long-acting epinephrine.
Then you're going to go into the study, where
you're going to get tested or whatever the task is.
And please sit down in the waiting room for a while.
And the actual experiment took place in the waiting room.
Sitting there in the waiting room
was another individual, a confederate
of Schachter-- somebody working on the experiment.
In half the cases, what the person sitting
there was supposed to do was say, I can't believe it!
I was supposed to go, and they said I would have a 1 o'clock
appointment for this.
It is 1:30 already.
I'm going to miss my class.
My car is going to get towed.
I'm totally pissed off.
I can't believe these people are doing it.
Meanwhile, half the time the other person
is sitting there saying, god, I love these psych studies!
Do you do a lot of them?
I love doing these ones!
I had such a cool one last week.
Which dorm are you in?
Let's-- and off it goes.
The key thing being, totally different emotional states
and each case being exposed to someone
in a very emotionally aroused, agitated, expressive state.
And what did Schachter show?
Does epinephrine make you get more angry?
Does epinephrine make you get more friendly?
It doesn't do either.
It's modulatory.
What epinephrine does is it kicks up
the fevered level of whatever emotion
you are socially being brought into.
And thus what you got was the subject sitting there, soaked
in epinephrine, while somebody is, like, going on
about how late it is, and these people-- before you know it,
they're up there, banging on the counter at the receptionist
and saying, this is an outrage, and this is unfair,
and all of that-- getting caught up in it.
Meanwhile, the other one, within, like,
five minutes, he's singing frat songs
with this person [INAUDIBLE], and they're
going to get together for dinner,
and they're hugging each other.
And what does epinephrine do?
It does not cause a behavior, it exaggerates, it magnifies,
emotional states that have been provoked for other reasons.
It modulates.
The exact same concept as the other day-- what
does GABAA do to that neuron A?
It does nothing whatsoever.
What GABAA does is it modulates the ability
of this glutamatergic neuron to talk to A.
What does epinephrine do?
Does it create any emotions?
Not at all.
What it does is jack up the intensity of whatever emotions
your social circumstances have generated.
Another example of James-Lange sort of stuff.
OK.
So you were sitting around, and you were terribly anxious,
and you go to a clinician.
And the person decides to give you-- what class of drugs
do we know endlessly by now?
Benzodiazepines.
They give you some Valium to decrease your anxiety.
Meanwhile, across town, there's somebody
who has a big gymnastics competition on Sunday--
whatever.
And they've pulled a muscle.
They've been having muscle spasms,
and this is really a problem.
So they go to their clinician, who
gives them a muscle relaxant-- Benzodiazepines--
the exact same dose.
So, wait a second.
Here's somebody taking Valium for anxiety,
and here's somebody taking Valium to relax their muscles.
What's up with that?
It's the exact same thing.
And it is a very James-Lange moment.
What's part of anxiety about?
It's monitoring the level of tension in your body.
It's getting feedback from muscle tone.
And that's one of the ways in which antianxiety drugs
like benzodiazepines work.
Because you're sitting there, and you're saying things
are just as horrible as they were an hour ago!
But I am so relaxed.
I'm, like, dripping out of this chair, here.
It must not be so bad.
Part of you deciding is monitoring the muscle tone
in your body, coming back with autonomic information.
That's where you break the cycle.
That's why the same drug decreases anxiety
and is a muscle relaxant.
More examples of this.
One is, what's going on with meditation?
That's what biofeedback taps into.
So you're sitting there, and you're suffering
from high blood pressure.
Translated into our terms, something here
is driving blood pressure to be increased too much.
It's not necessarily that.
It could also be blood vessels.
But we'll put it on a brain basis, here, for the moment.
So you've got a choice between taking drugs or doing
some meditational something that you
want to hook up to biofeedback, to make it more effective.
Here's what you do.
They sit you down, and they wire you
up so that they can monitor your blood pressure.
And you sit there.
And they say, OK, I want you to relax and focus, and focus
on the best day of your life.
Let's see what happens to blood pressure.
Nothing much.
OK, focus on your favorite piece of music.
Nothing much.
OK, focus on your favorite piece of music that's
kind of slow and dreamy--
And suddenly the monitor goes this way.
The person's blood pressure has just dropped 10 points.
And then you say, stop, wait a second--
what did you just think about?
Think about it again.
And it does it again.
And what the person begins to learn at this point
is, what aspects of meditative states,
what aspects of memory-- whatever--
suddenly allow the brain to be regulating blood pressure.
What's going on there?
You're using this machine to send the signal up there.
Part of what's also going on is feedback that way.
So, another version of one of these loops.
More versions of loops.
Here's one that probably accounts
for 90% of the arguments between significant others
on this planet.
OK.
So you and your significant other
are behaving, interacting in a primate social biological way.
And one of you does something that
totally outrages the other one.
And they're furious at you-- he says, personifying.
And they're furious.
And what's going on-- and they convince you readily
that you're at fault and, in fact,
this was a horrible thing you did.
And they're all agitated.
And you apologize, and you make it sound like you really mean
it, because you really mean it.
And you apologize, and great.
And they finally say OK, OK, I accept your apology.
Don't do it again.
It's all sorted out.
It's over with.
It's done.
And then you begin to think, OK great,
we're out the other end of the woods, there.
Things are just fine now.
Things are--
And suddenly they remember something miserable
you did to them in 1968!
And they suddenly remembered in every possible detail
and want to argue about it all over again!
What's going on there?
What we have is another James-Lange moment,
when you get into aroused, angry state,
and then it's all over with, afterward.
That's great, because the person has apologized.
So, cognitively, you have just adjusted
things-- yes, they recognize they did the wrong thing.
Good, I'm vindicated, that's great.
It's settled now.
It's perfect.
And you could do that in a second.
The trouble is, it takes a long time.
It takes minutes, now, for your sympathetic nervous system
and its consequences to completely coast back
to baseline.
So you're sitting there, and the problem has been solved,
but your heart is still racing.
And what do you have?
A James-Lange moment, there, sitting there, saying,
OK, well, I was really upset about that.
But that's just sorted out, and that's all taken care of.
Except I'm still feeling totally agitated!
It must be for some reason.
Oh!
It's what that person did to me in the second Roosevelt
administration!
And suddenly out it comes out.
It's this James-Lange loop, there,
of the physiological information coming back there,
prompting one into trying to find
a cognitive explanation for it.
There must be a reason why I am still hyperventi-- oh, this
must be the reason.
This thing we need to go over, also.
OK.
I am going to give you one factoid, here,
and you can do with it what you will.
But there is a pronounced gender difference in how long
it takes after strong sympathetic arousal for things
to go back to baseline.
[LAUGHTER]
OK, let's just get a show of hands, here.
[LAUGHTER]
Who guesses that it takes longer to get back
to baseline in males?
[LAUGHTER]
OK, well, unless there's a lot of abstainers here I think
we're-- OK, females?
Yeah.
Yes!
There is a pronounced gender difference in that.
And there's another realm in which
you have that same pronounced gender difference, which
is after orgasm.
Males go back to baseline a lot faster than females do.
And that explains a whole world of, like, you know,
he wants to go out and get noodles in peanut sauce,
and she wants to cuddle and talk to him
and all that sort of thing--
[LAUGHTER]
--and [INAUDIBLE].
And it's James-Lange's damn fault that that sort of thing
goes on.
OK.
So we, there, have another example
of these feedback loops.
A couple more.
Here's an amazing thing.
You take somebody with clinical depression,
and you force them, mechanically,
to take a somatic state that mediates different emotions
and signifies other emotions.
What am I talking about?
You take the person with depression,
and you say, you are going to mechanically go
through the process, with your facial muscles,
of smiling-- again and again and again.
And you force somebody to do that for a half hour or so,
intermittently.
And they feel better afterward.
The world is just as depressing as it was 30 minutes before,
but there's something going on here, saying,
if I am getting feedback saying I'm
doing this thing with my muscles, here,
and I'm doing it a lot, it must not be so bad.
Other studies showing you take somebody
and either they are slumped in a chair
or you have them sitting up erect,
and you tell them the score that they got on a test
that you just gave them before that,
and it's a very good score.
And what you see is, the more straight upright the person is
sitting, afterward, the more they
will assess themselves as being made happy
by the result they got, and being made to feel proud.
What's up with that?
The posture of your spine is doing something up here.
What this shows us is, amid this whole orientation--
the brain controlling hormones, the brain controlling spinal,
autonomic stuff, the limbic system telling--
all of this outflow from there, completing this big circle back
to the very first class--
That business of, think about something really emotionally
laden, and suddenly your body works differently.
Think about the people who have committed murders
in the context of a brain tumor, a period, their hormone
levels, their nutritional history, here.
Junk-food murders and all of that-- Twinkie defenses.
What that is, is the other half of this loop.
OK.
So now you should sit straight up and be proud of yourself,
because you now have all of the buckets
necessary under your belt. So that's
the first piece of good news.
And that now transitions us to the latter half
of the course, which will now be to use all of these approaches
in looking at specific behaviors.
Here is a sexual behavior, first off.
As a good ethologist, do we actually
understand what we've just observed for this species,
this individual, et cetera?
What went on in the brain one second
before that caused that behavior to occur?
What's up with the neurobiology?
What sensory stimuli caused those neurons to generate--
The world of ethological releasing stimuli.
What hormones in the bloodstream,
in the last minute, in the last hour,
made the individual more or less sensitive
to that sensory information, blah blah-- all the way
back to understanding the evolutionary legacy
of the species of which this individual is a member.
That's going to be our strategy in each one of these,
now, working our way back in time.
So there's that great news that you are in that position now
to take it on.
The other piece of good news is, we're not
going to do it on Monday.
We won't have class on Monday.
So you can all get all James-Langey
and freaked out for the exam Monday night.
But quick survey among the TAs.
So, what do you guys think?
Should we have a review session then?
Should we show a David Attenborough movie?
Show the Attenborough.
Attenborough.
OK, David Attenborough.
So which one are you going to bring in?
We'll watch Life, the BBC version,
with David Attenborough.
I don't think it's really available in the US
very much yet, so it's kind of a cool opportunity.
 Is this on?
Yes.
Well, congratulations.
Everybody has survived the midterm including
the TAs so far, who recently have been let out
of their entombment with thousands
of pages of exam pages.
So those are rolling along, and everybody is still awake
so that's good.
OK.
So we have now officially entered
the second half of the course.
And organizational things-- readings
will now be read hopefully.
OK.
So that's not useful.
Books.
Books.
Now is a good time to actually go and start
reading those books.
And again, if you are not up to all of both of them,
some recommend the chapters have come along.
Pay attention to those.
And again, a subset of you-- may not know it yet, but about 25%
of you will have your life transformed by that chaos book,
whereas 25% will resent the purchase price
and my forcing you to do this.
Also, another major, major transition here,
which is, as far as I can tell so far, I have run out
of steam turning the extended notes
into actual expository writing, so they're just
going to take the form of really poorly organized outlines.
So that happens.
OK.
What else?
What we now transition to is going
to be our strategy for the rest of our course, which
is to look at various subjects.
And coming down the pike after the lectures today and Friday
on sexual behavior will be aggression, competition,
cooperation, empathy, potentially language
use, schizophrenia.
Somewhere in there, there is going
to be a week or so on that chaos stuff.
But for all of these subjects, we
are now going to follow the general strategy.
We will start off looking at what the behavior is.
And what we're going to try to do there,
in addition to looking at in lots of different species,
is to be as objective as any good old ethologist
in considering the fixed action patterns
of the particular behavior.
That established, with the promise that, in lots of cases,
what we think comprise some of these behaviors
turn out not to be the case.
That established, what we will start
is our inexorable march to the left, the timeline that
constitutes everything we learn now,
stepping back and saying, OK.
One millisecond before that behavior occurred,
what was going on in the brain?
What parts of the brain?
What neurotransmitters?
All of that.
Stepping back before that, a second before, a minute before,
whatever, what was it in the environment
that triggered the brain to produce that behavior?
What was the acute releasing stimulus?
Stepping back, what do hormone levels that hour,
that day, some such time span of that,
what acute hormonal exposure had to do with sensitizing you
to the environmental stimulus which
released the nervous system into generating the behavior.
Marching all the way back, throw in culture some place or other.
Perinatal effects, early developmental hormonal stuff,
eventually considering what do the genetics of the individual,
of the population, of the species-- evolution
kicking in there some place or other--
what do all of these things and something having to do
with ecology thrown in there just for good measure.
Working our way back in each of these cases,
understanding what was the biology of one second
before, one minute, one hour, one million years before that
gave rise to it.
Back to our two major themes from day one,
we are now about to be unbound, unfettered,
by our buckets, our categorical buckets,
and instead explore their interactions.
The other being that notion from the very first class, which
is that any given point, if we're
talking about chronic hormonal effects
on this behavior, what we're talking about
is the way those hormone patterns were shaped
during this period, the way genes
contributed to the enzymes that make
the hormones, the receptors.
The second you're talking about genetics, all of this
is becoming apparent.
At every one of these points, whatever
point we are talking about is going
to be the end product of everything to the left
and just as temporary sort of footing before going
to the things on the right.
So this will be our strategy forever after now.
So we start off doing this with looking
at sexual behavior, the neurobiology,
the endocrinology, the early experiences, et cetera, et
cetera.
So to inaugurate the second half of the course and the fact
that it's starting off with lectures on sexual behavior,
it has to start off with the stupid obligatory sex joke.
OK.
So the Martians come to Earth, and they turn out
to be great guys.
They are really terrific.
They get along wonderfully with Earthlings.
All of them like each other a lot.
They're all becoming great friends.
They pass their hours learning about each other's planets.
What's the weather like there?
What are sports like here?
What are recipes?
Everybody's getting along terrifically.
And eventually, the Earthlings and the Martians
are getting along well enough that they get around
to asking the question that everybody is really interested
in, which is, well, how do you folks go about reproducing?
So the decision was made.
The Martians are going to go first.
So they clear out a big space, and a whole bunch of Martians
come in there and they stand on top of each other heads,
and their noses flash different colors,
and steam comes out of various orifices,
and there's clanking noises and whatever.
And out pops a new little Martian.
And the Earthlings say, wow, that was great.
Love the concept.
And I got great video of that.
And that's terrific and all of that.
OK
So that's worked out.
And now it's the humans turn.
So a willing couple is found, and some space is cleared out.
And the Martians sit down there with their video cameras
as well.
And clicking away.
And this couple goes at it.
And they finish the whole thing in a sweaty mess at the end.
And the Martian say, that's wonderful.
That's so interesting.
You Earthlings are just endless.
And the fascinating things you do,
but we have one question though, which is,
so where's the new human?
And they said, oh, that takes nine months.
They say, well, why were they in such a rush at the end?
So our first question here is, why were they
in such a rush at the end?
OK.
Three possible answers.
Choice number one-- vote for it--
why were they in such a rush at the end?
Number one, because they were acting with this fervent
desire to do something for the good of the species.
Just seeing if any hands go up.
That's a good thing.
Option number two, doing that because you
want to maximize the number of copies of your genes
passed on to the next generation.
Option number three, because it feels good.
OK.
One hand goes up.
And I'm not sure what that indicates about everyone,
but I will remind you from the survey in the first class
there that a far greater percentage of you
want to learn about depression than about sexual behavior.
So there you have it with the Stanford experience.
OK.
Because it feels good.
And what we deal with here right off the start
is this important dichotomy between proximal and distal
explanations for behavior.
Explanation, a distal explanation,
for sexual behavior, parentheses,
why were they in such a rush at the end?
Passing on copies of your genes, the effects
of hormones, and certain reward pathways
in the brain, all of that.
Proximal mechanism being that it feels good.
And starting off right off the bat the thing
to make sense of with sexual behavior
is it is driven by this amazing little loop here
of sensory stimuli, and feedback,
and immediate sensations that drive the behavior coming out.
And all this stuff down here is for the doctoral thesis
somewhere down the line.
That's not what the motivation is.
Probably more than any other of the behaviors we will look at,
the driving forces are very proximal ones.
Nobody sits there and figures out how many copies of genes
they are passing on and thus are willing to speed up to produce
a new human nine months later.
It is instead, in species after species,
it is proximal motivating mechanisms
for generating the behaviors.
OK.
So beginning to look at the actual behaviors,
there is a funny duality to making sense of sexual behavior
across different species, a funny sort of contrast.
The first one being that, well, all species go about sex--
or all vertebrate species go about sex
in a roughly similar way.
Yet, you don't want to be too similar to the species
next door.
There's an interesting sort of dichotomy there.
All sorts of vertebrate species are doing things
with pelvic thrusting and orgasms and-- hey,
stay tuned that's coming-- and ejaculation,
and lordotic reflexes, and things of that sort.
Highly conserved fixed action patterns across lots and lots
of different species.
None the less, amid that, you've got this other problem,
which is you want to have these fixed action patterns being
specific to your species.
You do not want to mess up.
So there is this strange simultaneity
of very, very conserved basic building
blocks of the fixed action patterns of sexual behavior.
But along with that, a lot of selectivity within species.
Now how does that selectivity begin to work?
What you get is this very interesting interplay,
this intercalation, between the releasing stimuli and the fixed
action pattern.
What you get is this chaining of behavior.
In other words, the fixed action pattern of one
of the individuals constitutes the releasing stimulus
for the other individual's fixed action pattern, which
constitutes the releasing stimulus for this individual's
fixed action pattern.
This chaining of transitions there,
of interplay between these two, which
is where you get the species specificity from.
OK.
So in terms of making sense of that, of course,
any of this in terms of looking at the general features of how
to think about sexual behavior across species, of course, what
you have to have out the wazoo is your basic ethology credo
of interviewing an animal in its own language
about its sexual behavior, wonderfully
summarized in this quote by Martha McClintock, researcher.
I think I've used this quote already,
which is, in her particular case,
studying female rat sexual behavior, which turns out
to be this very ornate process involving
a lot of running around on the part of the female.
Studying female rat sexual behavior in a cage
is like trying to study swimming behavior of a dolphin in a bath
tub.
You need to get it in the natural setting,
or else you are going to lose all sorts of insight.
In the particular realm of female rat sexual behavior,
the standard picture for decades and decades,
the centuries where our finest minds have looked
at rats having sex, the standard dogma
has been that the female role is a very passive receptive one.
And it turns out it's a very passive receptive
one if she doesn't have enough room
to run around and do all sorts of courting stuff on her own,
all sorts of proceptive sexual behaviors, which she can't see,
if you're studying an animal in a setting where they can't
speak in their own language.
So a big, big vote for ethological logical principles
when it comes to this.
All right.
So just to get some jargon under our belt right
from the start here, in terms of how the professionals talk
about sex when they're talking about sex
and trying to sound like professionals,
here are some of the terms.
Old outdated term, Freudian term,
that nonetheless has entered the general world
of referring to sexual arousal and motivation-- libido.
Libido, as we will see that commonplace everyday usage
term, is perhaps more technically described
as horniness.
But it can also be described as one term
within a trio of the terms that people in the business
really use most frequently-- attractivity, proceptivity,
and receptivity.
Quick, get to work on poems about those three terms.
But what you've got here is attractivity,
how attractive an individual is to someone else.
Receptivity, how receptive that individual
is to the interest of the other individual.
Proceptivity, the active behaviors
that are carried out in response to being attracted to.
And thus, you could say because of the attractiveness
of this organism, this other organism
began proceptive behaviors which did or did not
prove to meet with receptive fixed action patterns
and responses.
The very words any of us would use
to describe what goes on at a party.
OK.
So we've got that triad there, the terms that
are much more in common than terms like libido or arousal
or motivation.
These are the more common ones.
What is another realm, in terms that are much more used,
these are much more zoology terms.
What's used far more often in clinical medicine
is a description, a dichotomy, between motivation
and performance.
And that is never used more frequently than in the realm
of making sense of sexual motivation
in men as dissociable from erectile function
versus dysfunction, motivation being very, very
different from performance.
So that's another realm of distinctions.
Other realms as well-- desire, orgasms, arousal,
all sorts of commonplace terms.
The performance versus motivation dichotomy
and the proceptivity, receptivity, [INAUDIBLE]
are the major terms that are used.
Next issue, in terms of getting to this,
how do people find out information
about sexual behavior?
One option is to sit there with night viewing goggles.
And that's very useful for nocturnal species.
But how do people find out about human sexual behavior?
All sorts of ways over the years,
starting with anonymous questionnaires.
But a really clever technique was worked out in the 1980s.
A biological mathematician named Joel Cohen
getting at how to get people to tell you
about very embarrassing things about their sexual lives.
And this was prompted in the 80s when AIDS first swept in,
and it was wildly, wildly taboo at the time
in virtually every corner of this country
to admit to having a less than standard, white bread
sexual orientation.
Take a look at the extended notes to see the trick
that Joel Cohen came up with, a very clever device
in order to figure out what percentage of people
are doing what sexually without asking anybody
to give an answer that they would find, perhaps,
to be embarrassing or grounds for all sorts of persecution.
OK.
So beginning to look at aspects of behavior and other
features of the rightmost end of all of this.
We start off with the most central puzzle
in making sense of any of this stuff, which is, so
what's up with female orgasms?
And we've got right off the bat the simple problem
of making sense of this biological phenomenon and one
where fertility is not dependent on it.
One does not need to have orgasms to become pregnant,
to give birth, to pass on copies of one's genes.
So what's the deal with orgasms?
First off, a question we will wind up
asking with a whole lot of the behavior coming down the line
is, are we the only species?
And all sorts of careful studies have
shown that we are not the only species.
Other apes, other primate species, as well
monkeys and apes, show orgasm among the females.
And that is detectable by all sorts of physiology
we'll hear about in a while.
We are not the only species.
One of the really bizarre, pathetic things
about trying to do research in this area
was one of the first papers that ever demonstrated something
which physiologically was identical to female orgasm
in rhesus monkey females, which wound up
being a paper in this journal Science.
Down there in the footnotes, the authors
had to indicate this did not make use of any federal grant
money to carry out the study.
Just to give you a sense of where some of the stuff sits.
OK.
So what's up with female orgasm?
It is not necessary for conception.
It is not necessary to increase the number of copies
of your genes in future generations.
Despite that, there is some evidence
that it facilitates fertilization.
And the technical term that's always been given for that
is, bizarrely enough, facilitation.
The notion is something about the vaginal fluid, something
about the biochemistry of, increases sperm motility.
Sperm swim faster and harder and jump upstream back to spawn
or whatever it is the sperm are doing
with more avidity, with more energetic displays,
in an environment of more vaginal secretion.
And orgasm greatly increases that.
So the argument there being that orgasm
facilitates fertilization through the sperm facilitation
process.
Evidence for that has always been a little bit indirect.
It is not airtight that that happens.
Another argument for why this increases fertility.
And this is sort of an interesting one.
And the notion here is that what an orgasm does is,
among other things, exhausts you enormously,
causing you to be far more likely to be
horizontal than vertical shortly thereafter, and thus,
facilitating fertilization because the sperm don't
have to swim straight up against gravity.
I kid you not.
This is one of the leading models out there.
Then there's the orgasm facilitates female conception
out of reinforcement theory, which is back
to the it feels good and thus you are more likely to do it
again and increasing the likelihood of passing on copies
of your genes.
All of this is wonderful.
All of these possible mechanisms where,
even though female orgasm is not necessary for conception,
it nonetheless increases the likelihood of.
That's great.
However, what most of the studies have shown,
though, is there is no relationship
between the fertility of a woman and her propensity
towards orgasm.
It does not seem to play out in so far as any
of this facilitation or horizontal
swim enhancement techniques or whatever actually occurs--
these are not big enough of effects to actually make
a difference in terms of reproductive success.
So what else?
What else is known about it?
There is a certain degree of heritability,
of propensity towards orgasm in females.
And this is shown with all our standard behavior
genetics techniques in terms of comparing dizygotic
versus monozygotic twins.
We know what to do in terms of not overvaluing findings
like those.
Nonetheless, they are there.
So if a basic puzzle is, why do females have orgasms
if it's not necessary for conception and, in fact,
the evidence is not great that it even facilitates it,
why on top of all of that, why such things
as clitoral orgasms, which the studies generally show
are more easily brought about than
are vaginal ones, what's up with that?
Even more the same question.
Now somewhere in there is a lurking
the heart breaking possibility in making
sense of why female orgasm exists the dreadful possibility
that what we're dealing with here is a spandrel.
And that it is a spandrel.
It is simply baggage brought along
that those guys have to go through this orgasm physiology
to do any stuff with sperm and pass on copies of genes
and all of that.
And it's simply baggage that the same physiology
occurs in females.
That orgasm is simply a spandrel in women.
And the counter scenario that's always given
is, this is exactly equivalent to the notion
that nipples are spandrels in men,
in that women, female mammals, need to go about all
this lactation business.
And that's part of the whole package deal.
And just as it would be way too much work to evolve females
without orgasms, it would be way too
much to get rid of those useless nipples on men.
OK.
Let's have a quick survey.
Yes?
So could a lot of those questions
also be applied to why do male have orgasms?
Because ejaculation can occur without orgasm.
OK.
So why do males have orgasms?
Ejaculation can occur-- it is far more voluminous
in the face of an orgasm.
So that's easily framed in terms of an adaptive mechanism.
OK.
Quick survey here.
How many people-- OK, how many guys
who have those useless nipples, how many of you
go for the nipple as spandrel in guys theory?
Whoa.
Is that slow in the hands?
OK.
Should I raise my hand?
Should I not raise my hand?
OK.
Women in the room, how many go for the female orgasm
is merely spandrel theory?
If I recall, there was one other question somewhere a few weeks
back that only got one person fessing up to it,
and it came somewhere around there also.
So I don't know if that's the lighting
or if people tend to sit in the same places.
OK.
So not a whole lot of enthusiasm for the spandrel concepts here.
Nonetheless, that needs to be seriously entertained.
OK.
So now looking at other features of the fixed action patterns,
and amid all these different species
doing lordotic stuff and orgasms and ejaculation and all
of that, what are some of the realms of sexual behavior
that are relatively unique to humans?
First off, one that used to be thought to be absolutely unique
was non-reproductive sex.
This is a world of difference than those species where
the female ovulates for like 2 and 1/2 hours every year,
and everybody mates at that point.
Or species where somebody comes into heat,
a female is in estrus.
Humans have non-reproductive sex.
And that was viewed as absolutely unique.
What it is now clear is it is not completely unique.
There are lots of other species that do,
probably most famously bonobo chimps and various cetaceans
like dolphins.
Nonetheless, it is certainly a specialty among humans.
What else?
Foreplay, that used to be in the category of human specialties.
And it is clear by now that bonobo chimps, for example,
have vastly more patience with foreplay
than average humans do.
We are not the only species with that either.
Huge, huge controversy.
How unique is homosexuality to human behavior?
Human sexual behavior?
And what's clear increasingly is we're not the only species
with that either.
The original view, when people would view homosexual behavior,
male-male, female-female, in other species,
it would be animals in captivity.
And it would be the, why is there
so much homosexuality in prisons argument--
lack of alternatives.
This was not normal, natural behavior.
What is clear from ethological field studies
is we are by no means the only species
to have homosexual behavior.
What else?
One of the things that we do seem to be fairly unique about
is having egalitarian sex, which is
to say that there are no human cultures where
as part of the central tenets of that culture people
are restricted, only a subset of individuals
are allowed to reproduce.
And this is a world of difference
from various species.
For example, New World monkeys, marmosets,
where it is only one male and one female
in a group that does the reproducing.
Instead, humans in every culture ever seen have egalitarian sex.
What else?
What else is highly human?
People used to think exclusively so
this endless quest for variety.
And again, just take a look at these bonobo chimps,
and you'll see how small minded we are when it comes to this.
But something else that is indeed
unique to human sexual behavior is the notion
that this is something you do in private.
There is no other species where the majority of sexual behavior
is conducted intentionally outside the sight of everybody
else.
That is rather unique to humans.
What else about human sexual behavior
seems to be specializations?
One that is fairly unique, if not entirely so,
is the subset of humans who psychopathological confuse
sexual behavior with violence.
And that seems not to have a whole lot of precedence.
So immediately one asks other domains.
Masturbation, that is not remotely a human specialty.
That has all sorts of other species as well.
And that used to get the, well, what else is there
to do when you're sitting in the zoo-- for the animals-- what
else is there to do?
It is not natural.
It is a default whatever.
But looking out in the real world,
and there is plenty of that.
And one of the most like implausible suggestions
for an adaptive just so story thing
is, why do male primates masturbate
to the point of ejaculation?
They tend to eat the semen afterward.
Whoa!
Great source of protein, go the adaptationists.
Everything has an adaptive basis.
This one does not ring terribly true to me.
What else?
Fantasy.
Fantasy in humans, is that unique to humans?
Obviously, we haven't a clue.
But here's one suggestion to me that this is not actually
the case.
And this was years ago where I was watching my baboons,
and there was this one low ranking kid,
this snivelly adolescent kid, where the nearest thing he has
ever gotten to a female in his life
with some high ranking female in a bad mood beating on him.
And he's sitting there minding his own business.
And along comes, I think by any baboon male standards,
the hottest female in the troop, who has a peek estrus swelling,
is no doubt ovulating that day.
Comes walking along, followed two feet
behind by the huge menacing male,
who was in the consortship with her.
And our guy just sits there and doesn't even quite
look at what's happening.
Every now and then, his eyes go up, watching them go past.
And as she walks past, he gets an erection
and then goes off and masturbates.
OK.
The charming-- I don't know if this is even
the word you can use in this setting--
but the charming notion is that we've just seen evidence
for some sort of internal fantasy life going on this guy.
OK.
You could be a killjoy instead and say, no, no.
She was giving off wafts of pheromones,
and that was what was responsible for it.
Nonetheless this is about as far as we
can get at asking this critical question,
are we the only species that does this fantasizing stuff?
Marriage.
Clearly, we've heard about monogamous pair bonding
species.
In terms of the formal structure of marriage, it is universal.
All human cultures have some version of it.
Across all human cultures, more than 90% of people
wind up in that culture's equivalent
of a permanent, stable relationship.
And this is the case in polygamous cultures.
We've already heard that business.
Even though historically, the majority of human cultures
have been polygamous, nonetheless, amid them,
the vast majority of individuals have been
in monogamous relationships.
Amid that, nonetheless, what is also
clear is amid that highly, highly prevalent pattern
of monogamous relationships, there's a lot less monogamy
going around than you would think.
And this was first sorted out-- people like Alfred Kinsey
when first working out that questionnaire approach
to people's sexual behavior, what became clear
was there is a lot less faith within pair bonding,
within humans in this country and has since
shown in all sorts of other societies
than one would originally assume.
There is social monogamy but not necessarily anywhere near
as high of rates of sexual monogamy.
And what the paternity studies have shown
is in most Western European countries,
the rate at which children have been fathered
by an individual other than the person claiming
marriageable credit for doing so ranges between 10% and 40%
of children.
How's that for a number?
OK.
What else?
What else tends to be a feature of human sexual behavior?
What you have is, of course, not only intrinsic in the fact
that there's a difference between social and sexual
monogamy.
You have cheating.
That is a human specialty in every culture.
What else is absolutely wildly human?
This notion of romance.
And romance is, by most estimates,
a relatively new invention in most cultures,
maybe a couple of centuries old.
And what is an even newer invention
is the notion that romance, passion, et cetera,
should persist, should last throughout the entire duration
of the lifetime's marriage.
That is an utterly novel concept.
That is perhaps 30, 40, 50 years old
in most Westernized countries.
That's a new one as well.
What that, of course, ushers in is
looking at issues of divorce.
Across all cultures, the average duration of marriages
are two to four years.
And people have made the argument
that that is the typical duration of children being
dependent on a high degree of parenting,
of both parents being around.
That is the average interbirth interval, two to four years,
in most traditional human cultures.
What's the term being described then
if that is the "natural" point at which most
marriages dissolve and turn into other monogamous relationships?
The term that is given is that humans
tend toward being serial monogamists, moving from one
monogamous relationship to another with, on the average,
a lag time roughly corresponding to the interbirth interval.
So that's charming.
What else?
What else do you have?
All sorts of other aspects of human sexual variety,
but ultimately, when you look at human sexual behavior
versus other species, we are so boring.
We are so limited when you look at the range of unlikely things
going on out there.
Species that are regularly hermaphroditic--
and people, in fact, have done studies
on how is it that a hermaphroditic animal does not
try to have sex with itself?
And these are usually worm type things.
And that's some version of an incest avoidance.
At the same time, there are other species where individuals
change sex opportunistically.
All sorts of fish species where that happens.
Lots of species that are parthenogenetic,
where an individual reproduces without the benefit of anybody
else's genetic input.
Even stranger, there's a bunch of snake species that are
parthenogenic, but the females cannot reproduce
parthenogenically unless they mate with males.
They do not actually get any sperm from the males,
and they get no genetic contribution,
but something about that is necessary
for the parthenogenetic event to occur.
OK.
So all sorts of bizarrities that make our fixed action patterns
look really pretty dull.
But nonetheless, these are the backbones of the human fixed
action patterns, and some of them
wildly unique, some of them far less
than people used to think, some of them
very, very unprecedented.
OK.
So what this allows us to do now is make our first big step.
What's going on in the brain?
What is the neurobiology of sexual behavior
producing those fixed action patterns?
And what you better bet right off the bat is we
are talking about the limbic system.
This is all limbic system until we
see ways in which it's not just all the limbic system.
But it is heavily centered-- no surprise--
in the limbic system.
And this was being noted first around the 1930s, 1940s
with the first experiments where there were lesion studies done
damaging different parts of the limbic system in animals.
And what would be noted was animal sexual behavior
would change.
And this was eventually termed a profile,
termed after the two scientists who pioneered this stuff called
the Kluvre-Bucy Syndrome, which is when you damage some
of these strange mysterious rhinencephalonic structures
in there, you change the sexual behavior.
You change, for example, in monkeys,
whether they are attempting to mate with another monkey as
opposed to an inanimate object.
They change aspects of the fixed action patterns
of the behavior and such.
And out of it, this was one of the main driving
forces on people saying, nose-brain, well, that's great.
But actually, what we're looking at
is a part of the brain that has lots to do with emotion
and emotionally related behaviors.
That was one of the driving forces
on the limbic system being pulled together as a concept.
OK.
So what areas within the limbic system are relevant?
First pass, there are different hot spots
in there depending on gender.
Among females, probably the most important area
is a subsection of the hypothalamus called
the ventral medial hypothalamus involved
in female sexual behavior.
What's the evidence for that?
Just go back to last Friday's lecture--
lesion studies, stimulation studies, recording studies.
Destroy the VMH, you do not get sexual behavior anymore
from a female.
Stimulate it, and you will get the same behaviors
that you would normally only see in an ovulating
female rat for example.
All the sorts of tools we heard about.
Reinforcing this even more is this
is the hot spot in the hypothalamus for receptors
for estrogen and progesterone.
So that makes lots of sense.
Meanwhile, another region of the brain that is typically
involved in sexual behavior in females,
a region in the midbrain.
The midbrain, which seems to have something to do with some
of the hormonal aspects of sexual behavior
that are specific to females.
Finally, back to that lordosis reflex,
you got to have a spinal cord to pull off
the full array of typical mammalian female sexual
behavior.
So spinal pathways, which do not exist
in males, lordotic reflexes, the back arching reflex,
is exclusively a female one.
Meanwhile, over on the other side of things,
there are regions in the brain that
tend to be more specialized for sexual behavior in males
than in females-- a different part of the hypothalamus
called the medial preoptic area.
And the exact same sort of evidence
is for the ventral medial hypothalamus
in females-- lesion studies, stimulation, recording studies,
all that sort of thing, and-- you
guessed it-- whopping great amounts
of testosterone receptors, androgen receptors,
within the medial preoptic area.
Very interestingly, something we will hear more about next week
or so, is another region of the brain
is involved in male sexual behavior, which
is the amygdala.
Mhm.
That's kind of interesting.
The amygdala.
We've already heard about amygdala fear, anxiety,
and all of that.
But the amygdala also plays a very major role in aggression.
And there's a little bit, a small domain,
of amygdaloid function in males that's
involved in sexual behavior, involved in sexual motivation.
Medial preoptic area is much more about sexual performance
in males.
Amygdala is much more about sexual motivation.
And all sorts of people have speculated fairly reasonably,
I think, that this may have something
to do with the fact explaining why, among humans, it
is far more likely to be males than females
who go about confusing sexuality with aggression.
That it's got something to do with this weird role
of the amygdala in male sexual motivation,
male sexual arousal.
What else?
OK.
Males have penises, thus they're the only ones
who can have penile erections, and to do
that, autonomic nervous system.
And what we will hear about, what you already
heard about in the introduction to the autonomic nervous
system, but also in the zebra's book is
that whole business in order to manage that, to pull that off
initially, it is parasympathetic nervous system
that establishes the erection.
The process of arousal involves the transition to sympathetic.
Full blast sympathetic nervous system
needed for ejaculation, that's what all of that is about.
Exclusive to males.
But then it turns out it's not exclusive to males
because it's virtually the exact same physiology underlying
clitoral erections in females, the same exact sort of thing,
which, of course, brings up the dangerous possibility
of another spandrel in our laps here in terms
of making sense of that.
I didn't say that just now.
Did I say spandrels in your lap?
OK.
Bringing up that possibility that is not
specific to male physiology.
What is specific, of course, is stuff
that's going on with penises in terms of blood flow.
There's generally a dichotomy between species,
between whether or not males get vascular erections
or muscular erections.
Vascular erections, you increase blood flow into the penis,
and you stop it from going out the other end.
And thus, you get a vascular-driven engorgement
as DH Lawrence would no doubt have described it.
Alternatively, in lots of species
there are muscular erections.
There is a muscle, for example, found in rodent penises called
the erector [? levae ?] muscle-- well,
that's not too surprising that it's called that--
and a whole bunch of cell bodied neurons
in the spinal cord responsible for pulling up the sail
or whatever it is you do there.
And what you get are differences in general.
The muscular-driven erections occur a lot faster.
The vascular ones, the hemodynamic ones,
last a lot longer.
Take your pick, but it's essentially
the exact same autonomic physiology in both cases.
Finally, one other thing, a factoid,
a useful one we heard last week, which is insofar
as there is very similar physiology
to orgasms in both sexes, there is that difference
in recovery time, how long it takes
for the sympathetic nervous system
to go back to baseline post orgasm.
And on the average, a substantial sex
difference in that.
Yes, everybody managed to guess it last week,
which direction it went.
A far slower recovery time in females than in males.
In terms of underlying neurobiology,
something that was a major finding in the field
were brain regions that differed in size depending
on your gender, including in humans.
And this ushered in a whole world of sexual dimorphism
in the brain.
And there have now been shown to be all sorts of brain regions
where, on the average, you get differences
in the size of nuclei.
You get differences in the number
of axons going through a bundle of fiber, all of that.
And we will hear about some more of those down the line.
But the one that has gotten the most attention in terms
of sexual behavior is a cluster of tiny nuclei
in the hypothalamus called the INAH cluster,
the Interstitial Nucleus of the Anterior Hypothalamus.
Do not write down what that stands for.
But it's a little nucleus in there
there, a little subset of neuronal cell bodies,
where you get a very substantial sex difference
in the size of this area, where on the average,
it is about twice the size in men as in women.
And back to the other week's rant
about statistical significance versus magnitude,
this is a big effect.
It is almost, almost in the range
where you can identify the sex of somebody
by looking at the size of this nucleus in their brain
post-mortem.
In rodents, you pretty much can.
A very reliable two-fold difference, males
larger than females.
As we'll hear in a while, one really interesting
exception to that.
OK.
So either some areas of the brain that are preferentially
involved and activated by sexual behavior,
depending on your gender, or regions that differ in
size substantially by your gender.
But then, at the end of the day, there's
all sorts of things that are absolutely in common.
Again, the physiology of orgasm, exactly the same.
What clinically the picture is is males having
problems with the whole system.
The problem tends to be too rapid of a transition
from parasympathetic to sympathetic.
In other words, the world of premature ejaculation.
The more typical medical problem in women
is failure of the transition from
parasympathetic to sympathetic, inability to reach orgasm.
And it is, of course, a huge social, cultural, political,
philosophical argument whether that
counts as a pathology or normal human variability.
I'm not going anywhere near that one.
But nonetheless, that is the more common pattern.
Neurobiology that's absolutely in common
between the sexes, which is all of that stuff
at the very beginning of why are they in such a rush at end,
the neurobiology of pleasure, and the neurobiology of reward,
and of anticipation.
And this is this whole world of-- as we
know already-- dopamine.
The role of dopamine in sexual behavior
is virtually identical in both sexes, which
is to say it plays a huge role.
You find circumstances where you deplete dopamine
from the relevant brain regions--
back to last Friday-- limbic system.
You remember that ventral tegmental area,
which sends that big dopaminergic projection
to the nucleus accumbens, which then passes it
on to all sorts of places in the brain.
Deplete that pathway of dopamine,
and you're not going to get a whole lot of interest
in sexual behavior.
You're not going to get a whole lot of libido proceptivity.
What's the classic circumstance where
you see depletion of dopamine there
and loss of proceptive libido?
Clinical depression.
That's one of the defining symptoms of depression
amid the various numerous forms of pleasure
that go down the tubes.
Loss of sexual interest, one of the defining symptoms.
So the dopamine system.
The general term given for that is
the mesolimbic dopamine system to distinguish it
from some of the other ways that dopamine is used in the brain.
The mesolimbic dopamine system is
absolutely central to the reinforcing aspects
of sexual behavior.
So what's the evidence for that?
First off, back to that distinction
that I think I brought up last week-- I wasn't paying
attention-- but I think I talked about,
which is the dopamine system there is not
so much about reward, it's about the anticipation of reward.
Did I talk about that in monkeys pressing levers?
Yes.
OK.
I should probably read the extended notes at some point
or look at the film of this.
OK.
What you see there is the dopamine
is about the anticipation of.
And the dopamine, as we heard, is
about also fueling the behaviors needed to achieve the reward.
Dopamine in this mesolimbic pathway
as driving goal-directed behavior.
And that is certainly the case with sexual behavior.
By now, there is a whole literature involving humans
where you stick them in brain scanners
and you do something or other sexually
arousing or interesting or something or other to them.
And then you see what parts of the brain activate.
And it's these dopamine pathways consistently way up there.
Showing just how subtle this can be, how's this?
You take men-- there's been a whole literature by now showing
that you present people in brain scanners with pornography.
And that must have been a really interesting in human subjects
release form you worked out.
But showing in both sexes, what you tend to see
is activation of dopaminergic regions.
We will hear in a little while a sex difference
in that domain that will probably not surprise anyone.
But how's this for subtle?
You take a guy, and you show him the picture
of someone of the opposite sex if he is heterosexual.
And you show him the picture of this individual.
And if it is someone who he assesses as being attractive,
you don't necessarily get this dopaminergic pathway
to activate.
It depends.
What this study showed was if the person is making what
would pass for eye contact, if they were looking straight out,
the dopamine system activates.
And if they're looking elsewhere, it doesn't activate.
How's that for a classic male sort of responsiveness?
If it looks as if this attractive person is
looking at you, it activates.
Even more distressingly from this study,
when you show men-- on the average,
blah, blah-- pictures of women who
they would rate as being unattractive,
it's when they're looking away that the dopamine system
activates.
Oh my god!
What is going on here?
This is pitiful.
What also has been shown is the exact same eye contact
phenomenon of gay men looking at pictures of attractive men.
Another theme we're going to see over and over, which
is sexual orientation being pretty much
trivial in terms of how it influences
some of this neurobiology.
Just switch the gender of the other individual,
and it works exactly the same.
Now when you look at this business about dopamine rising
in anticipation of a reward rather than a response
to the reward itself, it brings up one of the-- it
doesn't bring that up-- it brings up
one of the all-time interesting studies
that was published about a decade ago.
OK.
So the paradigm I described last week,
you put on the light, which tells the monkey that,
OK, we're starting one of those sessions
where if you press the levers adequately,
you will get a reward.
And they now carry out this behavior.
And as a result, they get the reward here.
And as we saw, dopamine doesn't go up after the reward.
It goes up at this point.
This is the I how to do this.
This is going to be great.
This is terrific.
Here's where you get the rise in dopamine.
This is not only the anticipation,
but if you don't have this rise, you
don't get the behavior, the goal-directed behavior.
Now in this brilliant study, what they did
was transition from a paradigm where,
OK, the monkey presses the lever 10 times and gets the reward.
Now what you do is the monkey works,
and it gets the reward only half the time.
It gets only a 50% reward rate unpredictably.
And what happens to dopamine?
OK.
Got your choice.
What's your vote?
It doesn't rise as much.
It rises the exact same amount.
It rises even higher.
OK.
You guys all understand anticipation and goal--
it does this.
It's one of the biggest rises you
will find in dopamine in the brain short of cocaine.
What have you just introduced into there?
This is, I'm all over it.
I know how this works.
This is going to be great.
I have mastery and control.
I am the captain of my own lever pressing.
This is all about that.
What's this about?
This is what dopamine does when you've
introduced the word maybe into the equation.
And that is incredibly reinforcing.
And people will work like mad in contexts of maybe
far more so than when they work in contexts of certainty.
Psychologists have known this forever.
This is intermittent reinforcement.
You never get more behavior out of an organism
than when you have introduced a maybe into it.
And part of the brilliance of this study
was what they then did.
Now animals either got reward 25% of the time
or 75% of the time.
On a certain level, these are diametrically
opposite manipulations.
In one, you're getting more rewards.
In the other, you're getting less.
What's the thing they have in common?
They both had smaller maybes than the 50% version.
And what you see is it would look like this.
100%, 25% or 75%, 50% maximizing the maybe.
And one of the most brilliant things
that various social engineers do with humans
is convince people that there's a 50% maybe when it is not
50% in the slightest.
That's what Las Vegas is about.
That's an entire world of very smart psychologists making
people think in circumstances where there's
like one tenth of 1% of a maybe going on there that is actually
a 50%.
And when you do that, you get dopamine like crazy,
and you get goal-directed behavior
as a result. Really, really powerful.
And this is so strongly the case that this explains an extremely
cynical thing that a guy I knew in my dorm
back when used to say all the time.
How's this for like a dispirited view of what
life is like, but possibly absolutely accurate, which is,
a relationship is the price you pay for the anticipation of it.
How's that for a grim worldview?
Go figure.
This guy had-- what a string of disastrous relationships.
But what you see here is introduce a maybe,
and it is very, very powerful.
One final piece of the dopamine system here that is pertinent,
which is, as you might expect from all
of our molecular biology stuff, there's
all sorts of different dopamine receptor subtypes.
And two of them are pertinent to this world of sexual behavior
and reward, what is called the shockingly the D1 dopamine
receptor and the D2 dopamine receptor.
And what studies show is in monogamous species, what
happens is right after mating, when a pair bond is first
formed, the second that's over with, levels of the D2 receptor
go way down.
You down regulate the levels of the receptor,
and you up regulate the levels of the D1 receptor.
What's that about?
If you drive down the D2 levels before they even mate,
they don't form a pair bond.
If you prevent the decline in the D2's after they've mated
and pair bonded or if you prevent the rise in the D1's,
they'll pair bond.
And then, 8 and 1/2 minutes later,
they will go and pair bond with somebody else.
The D2's seem to mediate the rewarding anticipatory aspects
of pair bonding.
The D1's, on a certain rodential level,
seem to mediate the pleasure of the monogamous, the truly
monogamous features of the pair bond.
So a very interesting interaction between the two.
OK.
One last thing about dopamine, and this one
is like even more depressing than relationships
are the price you pay.
This was a study which was really like someday
may come to haunt you majorly.
And in this study, what they did--
it was another one of those brain imaging study ones.
And what they did was they took people in two categories.
In both cases, these are people who
had found their beloved, their beloved, the person who
was their soul mate, the person in whose arms
they were going to die someday, the person.
And they divided it between these two groups.
One was a group where they had known the person in whose arms
they were going to die for like 2 and 1/2 weeks.
And the other is when they had been together
for more than five years.
So you put somebody in the brain scanner,
and you start flashing up at speed, subliminal speeds,
of pictures of individuals they know.
Important control in the study.
And embedded in there is a picture of their beloved.
And suddenly, somewhere along the way,
up flashes the picture of their beloved.
Be in a short-term relationship and the dopamine system
goes crazy and activates like mad.
Now, you come back five years later
into that same relationship with the beloved,
and you do the exact same thing.
And you flash up their picture, and the dopamine system
doesn't activate.
What activates instead was that anterior cingulate thing
we heard about on Friday having to do with empathy,
and comfort, and all of that.
In other words, what we see here is the neurochemical transition
from one's beloved from causing your blood
to run scalding hot to your beloved being
like a comfortable old armchair.
This is one depressing study.
So let's take a five-minute break to contemplate that one.
OK.
And then we will resume.
Lots of good questions just now during the break.
Disappointingly few along the lines of,
I've got a friend who.
So not a bunch of those.
But let's see.
A number of questions.
First one, can I repeat what I said about the D1 and the D2
receptors?
OK.
These are different types of receptors for dopamine.
In other words, they all respond to the same neurotransmitter
dopamine, but in different ways.
And these receptors are found on different neuron types.
So you're getting into all sorts of different pathways.
What you see is, in rodents, in pair bonding rodents,
they better have elevated levels,
they better have D2 receptors on neurons
being fed by this mesolimbic reward dopamine pathway.
They have to have D2 receptors to form the pair bond
for the attachment to occur.
The second that happens, you need to have low levels of D2
and high levels of D1 to remain faithful in your pair bonded
relationship.
So what you see in these voles is right after the pair bond
occurs, there's down regulation of the D2's and up regulation
of the D1's.
And if you prevent that from happening,
the pair bond that's been formed does not prove lasting.
So that's what I was saying there.
Somebody brought up the great question,
which I was going to say something about and forgot,
which is, well, how about like the D2 D1
ratios in humans and their sexual behavior stuff?
And there's been one study showing
that a higher ratio of D2 to D1 predicts
more stable relationships.
Small effect.
Not replicated yet.
But nonetheless, that's kind of interesting.
So on a certain level then, D2 seems
to be required, at least shown in rodents.
Who knows about us?
D2 is about the formation of the attachment.
D1 is about the maintenance of it, the faithfulness of it,
if you will.
Next, somebody bringing up the issue
in terms of female orgasm.
Maybe what female orgasm is about is a mate selection
mechanism, as in individuals who increase
your likelihood of having orgasms are ones
you are more likely to lower your D2 receptors for.
But the one problem with that one
that makes wonderful sense-- what the studies tend
to show though is the likelihood of orgasm
is much more a function of who the female is
than who the male is that they are with, arguing against that.
Let's see.
Finally-- no.
Not that.
OK.
So we already covered that.
And there was one additional question.
OK.
So what's the driving force in terms
of the proximal reinforcing pleasurable aspects
of sexual behavior?
What's up with why only some species--
us predominantly-- have non-reproductive sex,
can have sex all the time, versus other species
that only do for reproduction?
What that means is in other species,
the endocrinology of ovulation is the thing
that makes sex pleasurable.
And we will see shortly what that's about.
In females, it's the hormones associated
with ovulation that sensitize various tactile
receptors to respond in ways that mediate proximal pleasure.
And in males, it's the female giving off,
for example, the right pheromones, the right releasing
stimuli, driven by the right hormone levels that
constitute the proximal signal of pleasurable anticipation.
And what you find in humans is it doesn't work that way.
You do not need, for example, in women
the elevated levels of estrogen typical of ovulation in order
to have tactile responsiveness to sexually arousing stimuli.
Stay tuned though.
It's easier though when estrogen levels are higher.
OK.
Final brain region relevant to all of this
is the frontal cortex.
We already got a first pass at the frontal cortex last week.
And frontal cortex regulating your behavior, impulse control,
all that sort of thing, gratification postponement--
this plays a large role in sexual behavior.
What's the easy immediate explanation
that one can come up with, what the frontal cortex does
is it makes you be appropriate in your sexual behavior.
It teaches you the appropriate context.
It teaches you what aspects of proceptive sexual behavior
is not a good idea.
It keeps you from doing things you would regret vastly
afterward.
That's a very easy version of it.
And commensurate with that, you see
lots of circumstances of individuals
with frontal cortical damage doing highly inappropriate
sexual behavior.
One example of it, and one of those horrifying things
that can happen-- this was a case
that actually happened in a nursing home in Martinez
in the East Bay a number of years ago.
This was a man in his 80s who had had stroke damage
to his frontal cortex, who was found
to have raped a woman there, another 80-year-old
with Alzheimer's disease.
Damage the frontal cortex, and all sorts
of the, "this is not sexual behavior that you do"
constraints go down the tubes.
Just as importantly though, what the frontal cortex,
with all of it's giving you the discipline
to do the right thing, some of the time,
what that takes the form of is getting
you to do proceptive sexual behavior.
For example, you are trying to do
some courtship of some other antlered ungulate
that you are courting.
And this is terrifying because there is another individual
challenging you.
And there's the frontal cortex that
is getting you to carry out those sexual behaviors
to that point, even if it is a terrifying circumstance.
Nonetheless, what the frontal cortex mostly is about
is reigning in sexual behavior.
It's not changing the fixed action patterns of sex.
It's changing the context in which the fixed action
patterns occur.
So now, we are ready to look at one more
feature of the neurobiology, which
is when somebody is having sex, what hormonal responses are
triggered?
Notice this is not here.
This is not what hormones have to do with bringing
about sexual behavior.
This is, what are the hormonal responses to sexual behavior?
Starting off in females, including human females,
having sex increases secretion of
progesterone-derived hormones.
And that has something to do with reinforcing the pleasure.
Interestingly, in females the world over, having sex
increases the level of testosterone-related hormones
in the bloodstream, androgens.
Women, females, generate androgens maybe 5%
the levels you see in males.
And they come out of the adrenal glands.
And they seem to play a very central role
in mediating sexual motivation, sexual arousal, in females.
How is that's shown?
Obvious experimental studies with lab rats.
How is that's shown in humans?
When women have any of a number of types of diseases where you
have to take out the adrenal glands,
sexual motivation, sexual arousal, goes down.
Give them replacement androgens, and
sexual arousal, sexual proceptivity, returns, so
androgens there playing a role.
But probably most importantly, in terms
of hormones triggered by sexual behavior in females,
is the release of oxytocin.
Oxytocin is really interesting.
We've heard about oxytocin twice already.
One, is when it's coming out of the posterior pituitary.
And the second is that minor business the other day,
last Wednesday, of oxytocin being
another one of those hypothalamic hormones that
helps to release ACTH from the pituitary.
Remember, it doesn't directly release.
It's a modulator, a CRH action, if-then clause, et cetera.
But those are the two ways we've heard about oxytocin.
Oxytocin also works in the brain as a neurotransmitter
and neuromodulator.
And what does it do there?
It appears to play a very central role
in forming attachments, a very central role
in forming of pair bonds.
And it, along with dopamine and the D2 receptors,
are critical for female voles of monogamous species
to form pair bonds.
Female humans, when having sex, secrete lots of oxytocin
and activate oxytocin pathways in the brain.
And it appears to play a role in the formation of attachment.
Interestingly-- how's this-- a whole body of research
now showing that if you introduce oxytocin
into the brains of humans experimentally,
they become more trusting.
Amazing body of research where you take aerosolized oxytocin
and you spritz it up people's noses.
And what they showed in the studies
were, number one, one type of study.
You then play a clip of somebody making an argument
for some stance in some debate, and people
believe the person more.
They find their argument more convincing.
They trust the person more.
Or the other version that's been shown
is you spritz oxytocin up the noses of people,
and you make them more cooperative in their game
theory play, the ways in which they
go about playing prisoner's dilemma and other games
we will hear about later on as well.
This has given rise to a whole new field-- I kid you not--
called neuromarketing.
The notion that if only you could spritz oxytocin up
the noses of people right before your television ad comes on,
they're going to believe you when you say it
will make you happy to buy our thing.
And they will fall for it.
There are actually neuroendocrinologists
making a living now selling their wares to neuromarketing
people-- self-proclaimed ones.
No doubt they are spritzing oxytocin up
the noses of those capitalists to get
them to hire them to do this.
But oxytocin playing a role in this.
So that's kind of interesting.
Because what's oxytocin mostly doing in the body?
The vast majority of oxytocin is not
this stuff up in the brain in these pathways,
some of them impinging on dopamine-releasing neurons.
The vast majority is not the oxytocin sitting there
in the hypothalamus doing something or other to ACTH
in the pituitary.
The vast majority is this stuff coming out of the posterior
pituitary.
And what does oxytocin have to do there?
It has to do with milk letdown.
It has to do with nursing.
And suddenly, instead, it's playing a role
in forming sexual pair bonding.
And the argument is made that attachment,
monogamous attachment, sexual attachment, is in some way,
evolutionarily a descendent of the neurobiology
of mother-offspring attachment.
That that's where it is originally being driven by.
So oxytocin playing a role there as well.
Meanwhile, over at the male end of things,
up go testosterone levels during sex.
In a surprisingly linear way, the more sexual behavior
in a male, the higher testosterone levels
are found afterward.
Critically, critically-- stay tuned for a little
while-- these are elevations of testosterone in response
to sexual behavior.
As we'll see, the evidence that high testosterone levels
make males more sexually active is basically nonexistent.
So critical, critical proviso here.
This is sex increasing testosterone secretion, not
the other way around.
What else?
Meanwhile, back to the posterior pituitary.
Was that a question?
No.
OK.
That was a head scratch.
OK.
Back to the posterior pituitary.
The other hormone coming out from there, vasopressin.
And oxytocin is to females as vasopressin is to males.
And we've already heard something
about this back in the molecular genetics
stuff in those if-then clauses and unlikely ways in which you
get mutations.
vasopressin, vasopressin also is found
in the nervous system, where it serves as neuromodulatory role.
And vasopressin is critical for forming a pair bond.
Back to that business about when you
look at monogamous versus polygamist species,
what's going on?
What you have uniquely in the monogamous
species is expression of the vasopressin receptor
gene on neurons that released dopamine.
In other words, male secrete vasopressin.
And if you are of a species where vasopressin now goes
and stimulates dopamine neurons, you decide you really,
really, really liked having sex with this other vole.
And you come back for more.
And that's the driving force on the formation of the pair bond.
Incredible studies showing that if you
take male voles from the polygamist species
and, due to gene transfer techniques--
I've mentioned the study already--
but you now stick vasopressin receptors
into those dopamine neurons, those polygamist males
now become pair bonding males.
They now become monogamous.
So really interesting.
What you then see in these studies is
you look at these monogamous species where the males have
vasopressin receptors on these dopamine neurons,
and you look at individual males,
and the ones who have more receptors
there are forming pair bonds faster.
It takes fewer rounds of mating with a female
to form a pair bond.
So what about primates?
So you start off looking at two different primate species, one
pair bonding, marmoset monkeys, New World marmoset monkeys,
and then one classic tournament species,
polygamous primate species, rhesus monkeys.
And what you see is you've got the variant,
the monogamous vole, vasopressin receptor gene
variant in the pair bonding monkey species,
in the marmosets.
And you get the polygamous version
of the gene in the rhesus monkeys.
So it maps on there as well.
So the more of this receptor in these dopamine pathways
within monogamous species, the more rapidly
they form a pair bond.
And what you see is differences in the mere presence of them
in comparing pair bonding versus non-pair bonding rodents
and monkeys.
So how about humans?
First thing that comes up is, among the apes,
you also find the two variants, the monogamous vole
variant of the vasopressin receptor gene
and the polygamous male variant.
So what species do you see it in?
In chimpanzees, you see the polygamous vole species
version.
That makes lots of sense.
They are a major polygamist species in their behavior.
But then, this beautiful dichotomy
comes crashing down when you see that you've
got the monogamous gene version in bonobos.
And as we will hear about in a while,
bonobos are the most hyperpolygamously, hyper
varietyish sexually behaving organisms on the entire planet.
They are as far as you could get from a monogamous species
as you can ever ask for, if you ask for such things.
And you've got the wrong type of vasopressin receptor gene.
Whatever is going on, it's more complicated
than the have the version that winds up
on the dopamine neurons and you are
going to have 50th wedding anniversaries if you are a vole
or you are a marmoset.
And it's got to be more complicated than that.
So how about humans?
And what you see is not explicitly
as much genetic variability as some people
having the monogamous vole version and some people
have the polygamist.
But nonetheless, you get variation.
The gene basically is about halfway in between.
Whoa.
We keep having that theme over and over,
all these different ways of looking at body size,
and sexual dimorphism, and imprinted genes,
and all that stuff.
And humans keep winding up being about a halfway
between a classic monogamous pair
bonder and a classic polygamist tournament species.
So the basic human version of it is somewhere in between.
But you get variations.
You've got genetic variations that either look a little bit
more like the monogamous vole version or the polygamous vole
version.
And what studies have now shown-- two different studies
independently showing this-- have the monogamous vole
version.
And with the small effect, you are more likely to get married,
you are more likely to remain married,
and both you and your partner are
more likely to rate the marriage as stable and happy.
That's kind of interesting.
Finally, in terms of the role of vasopressin,
in terms of attachment in males, all of that,
and in terms of social connectiveness,
a large body of studies now have shown
mutations in the vasopressin receptor gene.
OK.
Anybody want to guess what disorder you find it?
I put that in the extended notes, haven't I?
People have read it already.
I know, I fell for it last time.
I am not falling for that stupid trick
again of asking you to prove.
He sniffed some oxytocin.
So does anybody want to guess which the-- OK.
What do you now all know is there's now
been a lot of demonstrations of mutations
in the vasopressin receptor gene in family
pedigrees with autism, a disease of very, very little attachment
to other humans.
So we've got written all over the place here
some sort of role of oxytocin in female attachment formation
and vasopressin.
And we've already gotten interesting hints
that this applies to humans.
And we've already gotten interesting hints
that individual differences in the molecular biology
of these genes predicts something
about individual differences in the stability of relationships
in humans.
OK.
So everything we've been hearing about with the neurobiology--
and we're still living in this part, in this bucket here
temporarily-- has been built around
heterosexual relationships.
What's known about the neurobiology
of sexual orientation?
What has been found is most strikingly one landmark study,
one that got on the cover of Time magazine,
one that had a gigantic, gigantic impact,
which was looking back at that hypothalamic nucleus,
that INAH, I-N-A-H. Yes.
Where what we saw before was very reliably
on the average, men, their size of it is about twice
the size as in women.
And in other species, males about twice
the size as in females.
And a study was done in the late 80s
by a neuroanatomist names Simon LeVay.
LeVay is one of the all-time great neuroanatomists.
He was trained by Hubel and Wiesel,
was a professor at Harvard Med School
for a while before moving to the Salk Institute.
And what he did was look post-mortem
at the brains of a bunch of individuals where he knew
the sexual orientation, men.
And what he showed was gay men, on the average, had
this nucleus on the average was half the size
that you saw in heterosexual men.
On the average, it was about the same size
as you saw in heterosexual women.
Amazing landmark study.
Everybody learned about the homosexual brain
from this study.
Hugely widely reported.
And this is kind of interesting.
OK.
What's interesting about it?
First off, the question you need to ask is how much variability?
Fair amount.
It wasn't all that reliable of a difference.
On the average, it was about a half the size.
Next thing you would want to know
is, has anybody replicated it since then?
Yes.
Next thing you would want to know
is, where did LeVay get the brains from?
And these were predominantly from gay men
who had died of AIDS.
Is that a confound?
Is that going to perhaps atrophy this part of the brain?
Nobody knows.
So that remains as a caveat in that study.
What was striking though was everybody
learned about this finding.
This became famous.
LeVay became extremely famous for this.
And what was also very interesting
about it was the political context of this finding.
A few years before that, another group
had reported another difference in the hypothalamus
based on sexual orientation.
And this was-- there it is.
And what you found was in this part of the brain,
on the average, it would tend be bigger in women than in men.
And what these guys reported was in gay men,
it tended to be bigger than in straight men.
What was puzzling about the study
was this was a part of a hypothalamus having
to do with regulation of your kidneys.
And it was totally ignored and completely bizarre,
except there was one thing that was
done with it, which was this was viewed
as a totally offensive study in the gay community.
This was viewed as an attempt by scientists
to pathologize sexual orientation, to say, you see,
we found something wrong in the brains of homosexual men.
This part of the brain is bigger than it should be.
It's bigger than it's supposed to be.
There's probably two reasons why that occurred.
The first one was that the scientists who did it
were straight.
And the second reason being that they were a Dutch group.
And I am willing to bet unconsciously there
was something central European Nazi echoes of Germanic
sounding authors producing this finding, which there
is no shortage of history in the gay community for being
skittish about Nazi notions of what normality
is in human behavior and human brains.
This finding got widely condemned in the gay community.
Out came LeVay with his finding, and he became the most
beloved neuroanatomist ever in the history of gay communities.
One probably important feature reason for it
is that LeVay was gay, very openly so.
Another reason was the part of the brain he found made sense.
It had something to do with sexual behavior as opposed
to the totally puzzling thing.
So what was this about?
Very interestingly, the explanation almost certainly
is that this was the part of the hypothalamus
next door to the area that LeVay studied.
And if this part were smaller in gay men
simply because of just physical constraints stuff,
this part could get bigger in gay men.
Because this one was taking up less area.
That's probably what was going on.
What's really fascinating though is the political context
that this research was done in.
And this was that first group, the senior author of it,
a man named Dick Schwab.
And he got death threats because of that study reporting,
ooh, here is-- easily interpreted as-- something
wrong in the brains of gay man.
And Simon LeVay became the hero in the community.
This was utterly embraced by the community.
Because in large part, how it was interpreted as,
this is biology.
This isn't choice.
This is biology.
Look at this.
This is ridiculous, us saying, oh my god.
If we have gay teachers in the classroom,
we will turn the Boy Scouts of America into a gay men.
Oh my god, if we have blue-eyed teachers in the classroom--
the usual argument that this is absolute gibberish to demonize
sexual orientation as a choice.
Look at this.
There's a neurobiology of it.
And this was sufficiently that I've seen people in the Castro
District in San Francisco-- this has disappeared somewhat,
showing the half life of neuroanatomical knowledge.
But during that time, people in the Castro District up
in the city there, which is a very gay community,
I have seen people with t-shirts saying-- the other term
people never really wanted to embrace this INAH,
so its nickname was the sexually dimorphic nucleus
of the hypothalamus.
And I have seen people with t-shirts saying,
the only small thing about me is my sexually dimorphic nucleus.
They were actually selling t-shirts
that would say this during gay pride parades around 1990
or so.
Isn't it great when people learn neuroanatomy
out in the general public there?
OK.
So an interesting brain difference
confounded by people who died of AIDS.
It's still not clear what that means
in terms of possibly negating the finding at least
independently replicated.
Fascinating piece of not science,
but the political context of science.
This politically incorrect to an extreme, this very,
very widely embraced.
One interesting thing is that paper by LeVay of
was published in the journal Science.
Again, constantly mentioned as probably the most influential
science journal in this country.
And it was published-- what year was it? '88.
'88, '92, '90?
OK.
I'm getting the year wrong.
But it was just before the Clinton election against Bush
where one of the big issues was gays in the military.
That was the first thing that Clinton turned to
after he was elected.
I happen to know the man who is the editor of Science
at the time.
And they timed the publication.
That paper came out in late October of that year.
And they held it for that time because they
knew that this was going to be an issue in the election, which
was kind of cool that they did that, although some people may
disagree.
OK.
But we hurtle on.
So what other biological, neurobiological differences,
as a function of sexual orientation?
Another one that comes through over and over and over again,
which-- what do you make of this--
is apparently there is a reliable gender difference
in the length of the second finger
versus the fourth finger, the ratio of the two.
And just to show how bi-- whoa, did a lot of hands
just go up in this auditorium.
And just to show how biologically compelling
the explanation is for it, I don't actually
remember which like-- who's got the greater four to two
ratio, which sex, or whatever.
But it is a very-- now people are
checking each other's hands.
OK.
The first wave of-- and now all this chimp hand inspection
stuff happening in here.
And what has been shown quite reliably since then is,
on the average, gay men tend to have the finger length
ratio of straight women rather than of straight men.
A small effect there.
Another even more bizarre finding,
which is there is something called the autoacoustic reflex.
And what that is is if you sit there and plug your ears up
with your fingers, you will hear a noise that is just
coming from the intrinsic vibration of something
right there in your ears, and that's
the autoacoustic reflex generating some low Hertz
sound in there.
And the rate of the oscillation differs by sex in humans,
which no doubt explains everything
about the tragic wars of the sexes
and why people just don't understand each other
by gender because of their ears vibrating at different speeds.
But what these studies have also shown
was gay men having the autoacoustic reflexive
vibratory speed more typical of straight women
than straight men.
Again, a very small effect.
What are all of these about?
The assumptions are it's got to do
with something with prenatal hormone environment.
Stay tuned.
We will be coming back to this.
Now somewhere in there you may ask, OK,
well what about the neurobiology of sexual orientation in women?
Vastly smaller literature.
Far, far less studied.
What has been shown so far are only two endpoints.
One is the same deal with the fourth to second finger ratio.
On the average, gay women have the ratio more typical
of straight men than straight women.
The other thing that's been shown
is the same autoacoustic reflex thingy going on there.
Final realm of neurobiology, rather than
issues of gay versus straight, what
is the neurobiology of transsexuality?
And that used to be considered to be purely
a domain of psychopathology.
If being gay used to be a certifiable psychiatric
disorder-- up until the early 1970s, the American Psychiatric
Association in their textbook, the Diagnostic Statistical
Manual, you could be psychiatrically certified
as ill.
A psychiatric disorder was being homosexual or lesbian.
And then in what had to have been one of the more
all-time blow out committee meetings ever,
they decided that, no, actually it's
not a psychiatric disorder.
And overnight, about 40 million Americans
were cured of a psychiatric disease.
The notion of transsexuality as a psychiatric disorder
has had much, much longer shelf life.
What's the neurobiology of that?
To date, there have been a handful of studies,
and they show essentially the same thing-- really,
really interesting.
Another region of the brain that shows
a sex difference in its average size--
don't even worry about the name of this.
It's called the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis.
It's where the amygdala begins to send its projection
into the hypothalamus.
Another one to those gender differences.
There is one type of neuron in there
with a certain type of neurotransmitter, where very,
very reliably it is about twice the size in males
than in females.
Sufficiently so that even in human brains,
you could pretty confidently determine the sex of somebody
by seeing the number of these neurons.
You'll see, I'm not even saying the name
of the neurotransmitter.
It's irrelevant.
It's just another one of those differences,
a dimorphism in a region of the brain, a really, really
reliable one.
And this was a study done by some superb neuroanatomists
looking at transsexuals.
And what they showed was very interesting,
which was very, very reliably and a very powerful effect.
What you would see in their large sample
size of transsexuals brains post-mortem
was people would have this part of the brain, the size not
of their sex that they were born with, but rather of the sex
they insisted they always actually were.
Wow.
Immediate questions one must ask.
OK.
Well, maybe this is due to the fact
that when people change gender, transsexual procedures,
there's a whole lot of hormones involved.
And maybe that's doing something to this part of the brain.
Critical control that they had was
this was looking both at transsexuals
who had made gender changes and those who went to their death
bed saying this is not the sex that I am,
I got the wrong body, but never made the change.
It wasn't a function of having actually
gone through the transition and the endocrine manipulations
with it.
Another control they had, which was
looking at men who would get a certain type of testicular
cancer where they would have to be
treated with certain feminizing hormones.
In other words, very similar to some of the endocrine
treatments of male-to-female transgendered individuals.
And post-mortem, you didn't see the changes there.
It has nothing to do with the hormones.
It had to do with the person insisting from day one
that they got the wrong body.
And this was a landmark study, fabulously
well done and controlled, and replicated once
since then showing that what transsexualism used
to be thought of is that people who
think that they're a different gender than they actually are.
What this study suggests is what transsexualism is about
is people who got the wrong gendered body.
And these are people who are chromosomally of one sex.
In terms of their gonads, they're of that sex.
In terms of their hormones, they're of that sex.
In terms of their genitalia and their secondary sexual
characteristics, they are of that sex.
But they're insisting, that's not who I really am.
This part of the brain agrees with them.
Also very interestingly that study
was done by the same Dutch scientists who did this one.
Again, this is very complex terrain
in terms of what these things wind up implicating.
Interestingly, that study was published right around the time
that the city of San Francisco did something very cool, which
was for city employees now, medical insurance
will cover transgender operations.
However, there is no evidence that the obscure endocrine
journal published out of Latvia or something
did that like the afternoon before the San Francisco
commissioners had their meeting on that one.
But nonetheless, this is a subject
with all sorts of realms of implications.
One additional study about transsexualism.
OK.
How many of you know about Phantom Limb Syndrome?
OK.
You are a guy with a penis, and you get a certain type
of penile cancer.
And what's often done is your penis is excised.
It is cut off.
And about 60% of men who have had to have their penises
removed because of cancer there wind up
getting phantom penile sensations, which
I don't want to know about.
What you see though is when you take transgendered individuals
who go from male to female, in other words,
as part of it having their penises removed, 0%
rate of penile phantom sensation.
Suggestion being that there is something much more
"normal" in that case than when a penis is being removed
for cancer, a whole new area of research, very novel,
very challenging.
OK.
So this has giving us a sense now of this bucket.
And we are now ready to move on to, what in the environment
releases some of these fixed action
patterns of sexual behavior?
What in the environment is doing this or that
to the medial preoptic area or the amygdala
or vasopressin receptor levels or any such thing.
What are the sensory triggers for the neurobiology
of sexual behavior?
OK.
Right off, what is obvious is we are in ethologyville here.
It's going to depend on the species which sensory modality
is most important.
And this is, once again, the crushing of the limbic system
equals nose-brain concept.
Limbic system equals nose-brain if you are a rat.
It's, once again, going to be interviewing
an animal in its own language.
You've got species where the releasing stimuli
are all visual.
And we've heard one example of that already,
which were the pathetic male turkeys getting faked out
by the Styrofoam female turkeys with the feathers pointing
the wrong way.
Visual stimuli.
Other species are quite visual as well.
Primates, non-human primates, monkeys, for example.
And what studies have shown is-- how's this for remarkable?
OK.
Here we have-- nah, forget it.
OK.
You will take a rhesus monkey, a rhesus monkey
from a social group.
And he's sitting there, and he can lever press
for various rewards.
And he will press a lever a certain number of times
to get some juice as a reward.
He will press a lever a certain number of times
to see a high ranking male from his social group,
no doubt to keep an eye on the guy.
He will not lever press to see a male who is lower
ranking than him, but he will lever the most
to see pictures of female rhesus monkeys who are in heat.
Whoa!
Is that weird or what?
And the bigger the estrus swelling on the female,
the more levered pressing the male
will do to be able to see this.
So that's kind of interesting.
And this close relative of ours, in terms of visual stimuli.
What is also known is humans are highly
visual in their sexual responsiveness as well.
Visual stimuli as releasing stimuli.
What is no surprise whatsoever is on the average,
males are more responsive to visual releasing stimuli
than are females among humans.
And this has been shown in various ways.
For example, now studies using brain imaging showing that
for visually sexually arousing material that not only
are men on the average subjectively more responsive,
but you get more of an activation
of the dopamine pathways in men than in women.
What's interesting also is that in men, you
uniquely get activation of that area of the amygdala as well.
And again, that weird world of the structure of the brain
heavily involved in aggression also being involved something
about male sexual motivation.
What else?
Then there, of course, is the world of tactile stimulation.
And what you've got is a whole domain where, not surprisingly,
stimulate the right tactile receptors,
and it is sexually arousing.
Are they sure?
Have they done enough research on this?
And you will activate dopamine regions.
All of that making perfect sense.
What also makes perfect sense is some types of tactile receptors
in some part of the body activate dopamine more
than other types.
We are now in the whole world of erogenous zones
and that whole deal.
What is also clear is that these receptors,
these tactile receptors, their responsiveness to stimuli
will change depending on your hormone levels.
And what you see is in women, tactile responsiveness,
the extent to which tactile stimulation of skin
throughout the body, but especially of the genitals,
tactile stimulation evokes more dopamine activation
when somebody is ovulating.
In other words, at ovulation, women's skin
is more sensitive to sexually arousing touch.
In men, it requires testosterone.
Men who are castrated, tactile responsiveness to stimuli
goes down in terms of finding them pleasurable,
sexually arousing.
Final domain of tactile stuff, the specialized version
we've heard of already, that lordosis reflex business.
Again, that's a spinal reflex, but this is not
a spinal reflex of bopping somebody on the knee
and their leg goes flying out.
This is spinal reflex where you only
get the lordotic arch backing in females-- arch backing?
Back arching.
OK.
You don't get either, but you especially
don't get the arch backing when you don't
have elevated estrogen levels.
Only when females are ovulating are those tactile receptors
sensitive to pressure on the flanks of the rear end,
and out comes the reflex there.
So tactile stimulation.
At the end of the day, though, without question,
as agreed upon by every scientist on earth,
the coolest sensory modality for sexual release stimuli
are olfactory cues, pheromones.
And thus, we enter the magnificent wonderful world
of pheromonal communication and pheromonal sexual arousal.
All sorts of interesting findings there.
First, at the end of generating pheromones
that are sexually arousing.
What is required in both species-- in both species?
Whoa.
That was an interesting slip.
What's required in both sexes-- OK.
What's required in both kinds is the right hormones into order
to generate pheromones.
Sexually arousing pheromones in all the different species
look-- that's where the species part was
coming into that sentence.
What you see is males do not generate sexually arousing
pheromones if they lack testosterone levels.
Ovariectomized females, women, rats, monkeys,
et cetera, who have had their ovaries removed
do not produce pheromones that are sexually arousing.
What that of course brings up is,
what are some of the chemical constituents of pheromones?
And this is very interesting because it brings up
another one of those weird domains of neuromarketing,
pheromones that have sexually arousing components.
There's all sorts of fatty acids that play a role in that.
But a lot of what is sexually arousing about pheromones
in different species are breakdown products
of sex hormones.
Breakdown products of androgens in males,
of estrogens in females.
And that winds of providing some of these sexually
arousing aspects of those odors.
What does that immediately tell you?
Your olfactory receptors have all sorts of receptors there
that could pick up on remnants of testosterone and estrogen,
things of that sort.
That makes a lot of sense.
What doesn't make any sense at all
is the following finding, which is perfume.
Perfume, in its classic form, is made out
of the sweat of various animals.
OK.
Except we're going to get into even worse domain here, which
is perfumes traditionally, before
getting the synthetic versions, were typically
made from the sweat of male animals.
Hm.
What's that about?
Musk.
Things of that sort.
Chanel No.
5 is made from the sweat of whipped male Abyssinian cats.
I kid you not.
And this even produced protests some years ago,
animal rights groups, about how we should not
be perfuming ourselves with the sweat
of whipped male Abyssinian cats.
Suddenly, you've got a real puzzle.
Along comes synthetic perfumes, and the majority of them
are made of synthetic versions of androgens.
Wait a second.
Perfume is made up of all sorts of breakdown products
of male sweat.
Isn't perfume supposed to like smell good to guys?
We have a deep abiding puzzle here.
And there is an answer for it.
Let me survey people first off.
OK.
Guys in the room, how many of you
basically think that most perfumes smell
kind of appealing?
OK.
How many of you don't?
OK.
Females, how many of you think your basic off-the-rack perfume
smells appealing?
OK.
Well, that proves something.
OK.
Just complete it, how many of you don't?
OK.
The vast majority of perfumes are not purchased by men.
The vast majority are purchased by women.
In other words, most of the marketing decisions
about what to stick in your perfumes
are being marketed for people who
are going to decide if it's appealing or not,
people who have lots of estrogen in their bloodstream
rather than androgens.
That is thought to be the explanation for how
it is that most perfumes are derived from male pheromones.
Yeah.
The other thing is if I were to wear perfume
it would more so that girls think I smell good instead
of for me to think I smell god.
OK.
Yes.
The strategizing starts.
OK.
So a whole new world of potential neuromarketing here.
But this taps into, what are the chemical constituents
of pheromones?
What sort of information is carried
by pheromones, olfactory communication, between genders?
It will tell you the species of the individual.
It will tell you their gender.
It will tell you whether they are gonadally intact,
whether they've been castrated or not.
It will tell you something about their health.
It will tell you whether they are terrified or not.
Have the sweat from someone or something that is terrified,
and as we already know, it will smell differently
to the amygdala.
It will have a lot more glucocorticoid breakdown
products in it.
And it will tell you, as we know already,
if it's the right species, if this person is related to you.
Final point before we then go into the specifics of what
pheromones are doing to the neurobiology of all this,
finally, not only do you need to have hormones intact in order
to generate the pheromones, you need
to have the right reproductive hormones on board
in order to perceive them.
Men who are castrated no longer find
the smells of female ovarian-- OK,
I'm getting ahead of myself here.
OK.
If you don't have the hormones on board,
if you have no estrogen and you're female,
or if you have no testosterone and you are male,
you will not be able to distinguish
the sweat of women and men.
Gonadally intact people can at above the chance level.
Finally, women become far better at detecting
the smell of-- distinguishing the smell of men versus women
when they are ovulating.
Finally, finally, that's not what you see
when you have gay individuals.
Gay men are better at detecting the smell of gay men
than either straight men or straight women.
So we've gotten the first pieces of here
with the pheromonal system.
You have to be hormonally intact to generate
pheromones that are sexually informative and to detect them.
What we will then transition to is, what sort of information
is being carried in the pheromones
and what effect does it have on the neurobiology
of depending on who's pheromones you are sniffing?
OK.
 Let us get started here.
So picking up from the other day, where have we gotten?
Not very far.
Behavior-- full range variability
of sexual behaviors, fixed action patterns.
Is this kind of dark here?
No.
Seeing in some ways what's interesting
is the conservative nature of sexual behavior across species,
other ways the sheer variety, trying
to make sense of what aspects of human behavior are unique,
all of that.
Then beginning to march backwards-- what goes on
in the nervous system one second before sexual behavior occurs?
And marching through the relevant limbic structures,
some of which have strong sex differences,
some of which don't.
Seeing some ways in which neurotransmitters
in the whole world of dopamine complicates things enormously,
marching through there.
Where we had then gotten to was asking, OK, so
what sort of bits of information in the environment, what
sort of ethological releasing stimuli
can trigger the nervous system to do its thing?
And you've got the drill by now.
So what we had done was look at a couple
of different sensory systems, and we had just
started to wallow in the world of pheromones,
of pheromonal communication.
What we ended with was number one, the hormone dependency
of generating sexually meaningful pheromones,
that business being that males have to have
sufficient testosterone.
Females have to have ovaries on board
to be producing pheromones that carry sexual meaning.
What is the reason for that?
The fact that a whole lot of the actual chemicals that
constitute sexually meaningful pheromones are made out
of some sex hormone breakdown products
and the sheer bizarrity but eventual wonderful clarity
of what's up with perfumes.
Then transitioning at the very end
to the business about how your endocrine status has a lot
to do with your perception of pheromones from the other sex,
that women who are ovariectomized to low estrogen
levels have trouble being able to differentiate
the smell of males and females, men and women.
And estrogen replacement takes care of that.
The exact same thing when you take away testosterone for men,
and what we were just about to get to before we had to stop
was one additional thing, which is
one's opinion about the pheromones
that you were smelling.
And this goes back to a literature,
a really interesting one showing that
not only are women better at differentiating
between the smell of men and women--
gonadally intact men and women.
Not only are they better at doing
that around the point of ovulation,
but their preference for the smell of males
gets more dramatic around the time of ovulation.
Meanwhile, over at the male end of things,
something rather similar in terms of what
you make of the pheromones.
And this was a famous classic study in which women volunteers
had their armpits swabbed at different points
in their menstrual cycle and put into little sealed jars,
and all sorts of male volunteers sniffing them
and rating their pleasantness.
And what you found was on the average,
the odorants were rated in the unpleasant direction,
but they were rated as least unpleasant around the time
that women are ovulating.
And I think once we get past the world of armpit
smells in little glass jars, one can
get into the more ethologically relevant world of men prefer
pheromones derived from women around the time
when women are ovulating.
Once again, a testosterone-dependent
phenomenon.
What we now begin to look at are some
of the physiological effects of sexual pheromones between sexes
within sexes.
One example you heard about in the very first lecture,
which is that whole business, that Wellesley effect
the ability of females of all sorts of different species,
including college freshman human females,
to synchronize each other's cycles,
this being done with pheromones, intersexual perception
of pheromones, so the Wellesley effect.
What's also shown in a number of rodent species
is the pheromones, the smell of an adult female,
will delay the onset of puberty of younger females.
And how might one frame that?
That is utterly a gene competition sort of strategy
there.
This is reproductive competition.
If you arrest the development of the other females around you,
you are going to leave more copies, et cetera.
Meanwhile, a literature of intramale
physiological effects-- what happens
to the physiology of males in various species
when smelling the pheromones of other males?
What you see, first off, is it depends
on who the other guy you're smelling, the dominance rank.
In lots of rodent species and some primate species as well,
males are able to differentiate between smells
of very high ranking males and very low ranking ones,
and what do you know?
They're not all that upset about the low ranking ones.
What do you see in terms of the physiological effects
in the number of species when males
are smelling the pheromones of big, healthy, strapping,
androgenic other males?
In some cases, it drives down their testosterone levels.
They're totally physiologically intimidated,
this being some great competitive strategy
for males who could pump out just the right kind
of suppressive pheromones.
In other species, though, what you
see is a sudden burst of sperm production,
and what's that about?
Another version of the same logic-- this
is a counter-strategy.
If males have come up, evolved the means in various rodent
species to generate pheromones that will drive down
testosterone levels in opponents, what males also
want to have evolve with some mechanism of when smelling
those sorts of pheromones to try to counter that
by increasing sperm production.
What we have here is a co-evolutionary arms race.
Terms of interactions of pheromones between the sexes,
and what I've been doing here is describing
all this without making use of this,
so what you see is physiologically
when the female is the pheromone donor,
and the other recipient is a female in terms of, say,
puberty, decreasing puberty onset,
and what we just saw with male is donor versus male
is in some ways suppressing some endpoint's testosterone,
in some ways increasing sperm production.
What you see in lots of rodent species,
when you're looking at between genders, when males
are the source of pheromones among rodents,
it accelerates puberty onset in the females.
And when you've got females as the donors,
it increases testosterone level and sperm production
in the males of lots of different species.
So all this makes wonderful, wonderful, sort
of sociobiological sense in terms of how this should work.
Elaborations on this, of course.
What you also see is not only puberty onset
and being regulated.
You also see in all sorts of species
where you can induce ovulation by sensory stimuli.
What you see is the smell of a female
will decrease the likelihood of induced ovulation.
Female-- the smell of a male will increase
the likelihood of ovulation.
All sorts of species that do not have
automatic rhythms of ovulation cycles of that way,
but rather they are induced.
And one classic example of that are pigs.
Pigs are inducible ovulators, if you've always wondered
whether that's the case or not.
And you can go and recreationally buy
a variant of pig pheromone.
This is known as Boar Mate, and no doubt,
that's not only patent pended, but somewhere out
in the Midwest, there's all sorts
of TV jingles about Boar Mate.
And Boar Mate is an ovulation inducer in female boars
and involving a same male-derived pheromone,
which are found in truffles, truffles which somehow
have stumbled on the means to induce female pigs to ovulate.
And no doubt, that's explaining some very interesting
interspecies interactions, so that being another realm.
Inducible all physiological changes--
in this case, one classic demonstration of it.
In this case, probably pheromones
of female causing an indirect measure of testosterone levels
in a male.
This is a classic paper, and you will
note that I didn't say females and males.
Saying a female and a male.
This was a classic paper in nature some 30 years ago or so,
which was written by the very famous and well-known doctor
Anonymous.
The author's name was not published there.
And this was a researcher who did research
in an unspecified hemisphere with an unspecified species,
but involved long stretches of being at a research facility
completely on his own in isolation from other humans,
and all sorts of people in the business for decades
afterward have been speculating on who the author is.
And it's generally understood.
And what this person noted was every now and then,
he would pick up and go to the city that
was a three-hour seaplane flight away
or some such thing, where among other things,
he had a highly significant other with a great deal
of physical intimacy and all that stuff
from kind of the right side of the chart.
And what he noticed was what he perceived
to be an extraordinary difference in what he
was subjectively interpreting as testosterone-driven mood
and level of energy and all of that depending on where he was.
Not quite being the type of field ethologist
that took blood from himself, what he did instead
was take an indirect assay building on the well-known fact
that testosterone has something to do
with the rate of beard growth.
And what he wound up doing was very soon,
having a razor there every day, shaving,
and getting the little bits of stubble, and weighing it.
Weighing it is an indirect assay of testosterone levels,
and what was shown was sit out there by himself
with whatever ungulates he was obsessing over,
and this sort of rate of beard growth--
go back to the rest of the world, and it does this.
And this square wave going on like that,
this as a very-- and OK, what are all the confounds here?
It's not clear if it was pheromones.
Maybe it was actually being in proximity
to the newspaper in the town that he
returned to now and then.
Maybe there was a confound of whatever
aftershave he was using that was doing something
rather to his testes.
Nonetheless, generally interpreted
as this being a really interesting, indirect,
and equal-- was one example of induction
of physiological changes in human males
by pheromones from females.
So if you ever meet Dr. Anonymous, who interestingly,
has been publishing papers for about 300 years
or so every now and then, congratulate that individual
on the research.
So pheromonal stuff-- now elaborations of it,
which you should be able to derive all on your own
from some of our principles by now, which
is, what if for example, you are a female donor
and female recipient, and the whole logic
here being decrease the likelihood of ovulation?
Delay the onset of puberty.
What if these are siblings, if these are two sisters?
And you were off and running with that one.
It will not work as effectively.
Easy kin selection argument.
So all sorts of aspects of relatedness,
you will not have your testosterone levels driven up
if you are a hamster, and you were smelling your sister,
all that sort of thing that makes perfect sense by now.
Now switching over-- one last piece of business, though.
In terms of the pheromonal attractiveness stuff,
a handful of studies showing that among homosexual men, what
you have is it's the smell of men who are preferred to women,
and it's when men have higher testosterone
levels that they are preferred.
And what we've got there is an exact same physiology
in a somewhat going in the opposite direction, flipping
of things that sure argues for some interesting biological
underpinnings.
One final thing-- women not only prefer the smell of men when
around the time that they are ovulating.
Their noses selectively become more sensitive to such
smells, and estrogen has all sorts of receptors
on olfactory neurons.
So that makes sense.
Leaping over to other sensory systems--
gustatory stimuli-- this is not one
of the more exciting outposts, unless you are something
like a giraffe, in which case you take part in what is called
flehmening, a good old Germanic ethological term, which is you
want all sorts of interesting reproductive information
on somebody else, and you just don't
have the time to sniff the air for pheromones.
So what you do is you go over and lick the individual's
private parts, and suddenly, you know oh so much
about their personal lives.
In this case, gustatory information being passed.
We've already heard about examples
of auditory priming, inducible ovulation
in various moose-like species in the wilds of Minnesota,
where what the stags have these roaring fixed action
patterns, which will induce all sorts of ovulatory responses
in females around.
So this is another domain.
Remember also that interesting factoid
when this was mentioned previously
that in human females, voices get
a little bit higher around the time of ovulation
and in a way that is detectable.
Something important in terms of all this pheromonal stuff
in humans, what has been shown over
and over and over again is these are all subliminal processes as
in the humans are not consciously aware of wow,
this one smells more like my gonadally intact second cousin
who was adopted away to Bolivia for awhile when I was a kid.
There is not the consciousness, but nonetheless, you
force people to make these choices,
and implicitly, you get insight into these same sort
of influences.
But, of course, by the time you get to humans,
and you talk about sensory releasers and all of that,
you get, of course, the point endlessly emphasized by Cosmo
and God knows where else that ultimately, the most erogenous
organ in humans is the brain, thought as a releaser,
thought as a more powerful humans are not a particularly
olfactory species.
We are not a particularly great auditory one,
et cetera, et cetera.
An awful lot of these sexual priming in humans
coming by way of thought bypassing
this whole ethological world.
More environmental factors, acute environmental factors
that can affect all of this, and what you've got
is a very reliable way to drive down
libido is to make an organism terrified.
Fear as suppressive of reproductive behavior.
What you also have is extreme rage doing the same.
Stress in general-- stress is interesting,
because what you get is a dichotomous outcome,
chronic stress.
So now we're not talking about an acute stressor,
but all the way back, chronic stress
is extremely suppressive of reproductive physiology
and behavior, which you will be finding out
when you read the relevant chapter in the zebra's book.
But what you see as short term, there's a lot more variability,
particularly among males.
What you see is a lot of variability
as to whether short term stress stimulates arousal or inhibits
it.
And people have pointed out all sorts
of horrific bits of evidence showing
in circumstances of extreme arousal and stress,
say, during warfare, where that produces all sorts
of violent sexual behavior.
No shortage of horrible historical precedents
for those.
So a difference between chronic stress versus acute
stress-- more effects around here.
One final interesting bit of releasing stimulus, stimuli,
whatever a bit of a stimulus is, and one
that transcends a particular sensory system
is something called the Coolidge effect.
And the Coolidge effect probably accounts
for like 49% of the misery encapsulated
in human literature and movies and all of that.
What is the Coolidge effect in species
after species after species?
You take an individual, who is sexually sated,
which is to say that, for example, you've
got some male rodent who's been mating with the female rodent
there, and has gotten to the point where he has had enough,
enough on some physiological level
or some deeply emotional what matters to me in my life
rodential sort of level.
But in any case, the male is sated,
has stopped having sex with a female.
And what the Coolidge effect is about
is he put in a different female, and things
start all over again.
Variety as wildly stimulating of sexual arousal,
and the Coolidge effect sure works in humans and accounts
for all sorts of misery.
Coolidge, by the way, was not the scientist
who first described it, but Coolidge
refers to Calvin Coolidge, and as far as I know,
this is the only anecdote ever to occur
about the guy, something where he and his wife
were being shown some chicken farm,
and there were breeding roosters.
And when they would get sick of breeding with this pen,
they would stick a new one in.
And Mrs. Coolidge made some sarcastic remark,
and he made one back, and before you knew it,
it was the Great Depression.
So I actually have no memory of what they said,
but in terms of wittiness, you get
what you can when you have Calvin Coolidge, so.
OK.
We hurtle on.
We hurtle on here, now beginning to look at an entire missing
category here in my rush.
Now we have what's going on with hormones,
longer term hormonal stuff?
Not the hormone levels that you have influenced
as a result of sexual behavior, not the hormone levels just
right around the time of all this neurobiology
happening, but now beginning to talk about hormone levels
like over the last 28 days or so in a female.
And what one immediately barrels into
is this issue of how much is sexual behavior in women
a function of where you are in your cycle?
What's the reason even to suspect
that the entire world of other species that will have females
coming into estrus, coming into heat,
having elevated estrogen levels only
at very demarcated times of the year, and what you see
is in lots of species, a large number of them,
in fact-- what you see is you only get reproductive behavior,
you only get sexual behavior in females around the time
that they are ovulating.
You only get active female proceptive seeking of sex
around those times.
By the time you get to non-human primates,
it depends on the species you're looking at.
But in general, it's not quite as tight of a relationship.
So if you had some rodent across a year,
this was all the points of ovulation.
Your pattern of sexual behavior of a female
would look like this.
Likelihood of mating with a male by the time
you get to non-human primates in most species,
it looks more like that.
It's not quite as dramatic, and thus, of course, the question
becomes, where do humans fit in on this?
And a classic study, extremely influential in the early '70s
was the first to look at this, which was females, humans,
women reporting their levels of sexual activity,
as well as the likelihood of orgasm
per sexual bout, if that's the right word,
and where they were in the cycle.
So this is what you wound up seeing,
and this by any measure, likelihood of having sex,
whatever, the curve looked something like this.
And what they reported was a big increase
around the time of day 14 and a secondary increase around day
28.
Not as large of one, and when you
looked at the likelihood of orgasm,
it was basically doing the same exact thing.
Day 14-- that's just a somewhat less restricted version
of the exact same phenomenon.
Never down to zero, but nonetheless,
this is another version of this exact same phenomenon--
libido sexual proceptivity increasing in women,
in human females around the time of ovulation.
But no other species shows this one going on here, so
what's up with that?
Any speculation why you have the secondary increase
around day 28?
Come on.
Somebody's got to-- yes, you're right.
That's exactly what they found.
That's exactly what they found, and good for you
feeling comfortable speaking up in class
all in unison like that.
OK.
What that tends to be is that women are more
relaxed about fear of pregnancy around the time
of their period, and, thus, sexual behavior increases
somewhat around that point.
But the thing that everybody most importantly came away with
was just like every other mammal out there
that has regular cycling or only seasonal ones,
high estrogen is when you get the most sexual behavior.
Instead of high estrogen is the only time
you get sexual behavior.
Instead, you simply get the most around then.
In the years since, lots of people
have done versions on this study,
and it is frequently difficult to replicate this phenomenon
in terms of a change in levels of sexual activity
in women around the time of ovulation.
What has remained very clear in the literature
though is that sexual arousal increases around the time
of ovulation in women.
Very reliable effect.
And what that is interpreted as is behavior
here may not be telling you anywhere
near as much as motivation, arousal, proceptivity
at that time, and that's a more pure measure
of what's going on physiologically there
or what's going on in the brains.
Fitting with that is a very interesting literature
suggesting that women act a little bit differently
in terms of proceptive sexual signaling
around the time of ovulation.
Studies showing, for example, that women as assessed
by both women and men, women on the average
wear more provocative clothing around the time
that they are ovulating.
Yes, people would go and study things like this for a living.
These were not big effects, but the all-time bizarre study
I've ever heard of in this domain
was actually published with a straight face by this guy,
and he's an evolutionary psychologist, University
of New Mexico, a guy named Jeffrey Miller, who
reported the following.
And you know what he was spending his time
doing, which he reported was that
around the time of ovulation, lap dancers get larger tips.
OK.
That has since been replicated in E. coli
and in various yeast species, and you know,
I'm not going to try to unpack that one in any sort of way.
But nonetheless, this was reported
and shows you just how wonderful it could be to be a scientist.
Can you imagine that money was being
spent on that-- your research dollars-- instead
of strafing people in Kandahar province or something?
So we have a peak there, this general issue
of what does hormonal cyclicity, in a time scale
of weeks to months.
What does that do to sexual behavior in various species?
What does that do to sexual arousal proceptivity?
What are some of the building blocks of that?
Estrogen-- as estrogen levels go up,
estrogen increases the expression
of receptors for progesterone.
So you can immediately begin to piece that apart
in at least two different ways, first one being estrogen,
thus increasing the sensitivity in the brain.
This is a brain effect.
Sensitivity to progesterone, which
has something to do with the rewarding aspects of sex.
You can also translate that into molecular biology.
Estrogen, being a steroid hormone,
is going to bind to its receptor and do the whole transcription
factor, translocation sort of thing,
telling you that upstream of the gene
for the progesterone receptor is a promoter that's
responsive to estrogen and estrogen receptors.
You know how this one works by now.
More pieces of it-- estrogen when rising here,
also increases the synthesis of oxytocin.
Back to all that social bonding stuff,
and what that suggests-- I don't know if it has been studied,
but that women will feel more affiliative with someone
they've had sex with if around the time of ovulation
than at other points.
That is certainly the case with a vole,
but that is certainly the case, because they
don't mate the rest of the time, and because male voles suddenly
are expressive around there in terms of their feelings.
OK So more building blocks of it.
Estrogen is not only having effects in the brain,
but it's also having effects throughout the body
at those times in terms of lowering the threshold
of certain tactile receptors.
What does that mean?
That means around the time that women
are ovulating, thanks to estrogen,
they are more sensitive to touch.
And I'm sure this has been studied in consenting hamsters,
but my bet is that more sensitive to tactile
stimulation in some parts of the body over others.
What estrogen also is doing, as we just heard,
is working on the olfactory system
and lowering thresholds for detecting the smell of males.
So we've got all sorts of ways within the brain
and in the periphery to bias towards more arousal
at that time.
Wonderful evolutionary biology.
No problem at all.
One additional piece of the female story,
which is the effects over the course of this kind of time
span-- weeks to months to years or so-- the effects
of those androgens, those male sex hormones
that females are releasing.
And what you see there is that plays
a role in proceptivity, increasing sexual arousal,
sexual motivation.
Meanwhile, on the other side of the road, we've got males,
and what does testosterone-- testosterone over
this time span-- what does it have to do
with sexual behavior in males?
Well, on first pass, it sure looks like it
has a lot to do with it.
What sort of evidence?
Initially, correlative evidence.
Well, the time of year in various species
where males do their mating is the time of year
when testosterone levels are elevated.
Over the life span, testosterone levels
go up around puberty and from about age
30 on, very gently cascade down into alarming senescence,
and what you see there is a similar profile in terms
of sexual behavior.
That does not tell us much.
These are correlations.
Furthermore, correlative studies in humans, a handful,
showing more sexually active men tend
to have higher testosterone levels,
and for what it's worth, a number of studies
have documented a dramatic drop in testosterone levels
in men right around the time that they become fathers.
OK.
So figure that one out.
Also an increase in vasopressin levels at that time.
You know how to interpret this one by now.
So we've got testosterone and higher levels
of male sexual behavior going hand in hand.
Are we looking at any causality here?
First off, we already know about one piece of causality,
which was the other day, sexual behavior in men, in males,
increases testosterone levels.
So that's one reason why they may go hand in hand.
In that scenario, testosterone has
nothing to do with increasing the likelihood of the behavior.
So does testosterone actually have
a causal role in increasing the likelihood
of male sexual behavior?
And the answer is yes.
And how do you show it?
With the most simple classic way of doing something
in an endocrine study, which is get rid
of the guy's testosterone.
And you castrate the male, your rodent male,
your non-human primate male, and what
you see is there is a big drop in levels of sexual behavior.
And this could range from male lever pressing to get access
to a female to courtship displays
to extent of pomading of hair or something
in the right neighborhoods, and whatever the measure is,
this is when normal testosterone levels are on board.
And this is after castration, a very, very dramatic drop.
Now to fulfill the second ironclad requirement
in endocrinology, the last thing you need to do now
is after the subtraction experiment,
to do a replacement one.
Artificially give back the normal levels
to the castrated individual, and levels of sexual behavior
go back to there.
Whoa.
OK.
That proves that we have a causal relationship here.
Not so fast.
First thing to note, which is 0% testosterone and sexual
behavior goes way, way down.
It doesn't go to zero.
In every species looked at, starting
with the embarrassing sexual behavior of everyone's pet dogs
when they were six years old, even after being neutered, what
you see is there's a level of residual sexual behavior--
rodents, dogs, primates, including humans.
This is a critical point.
How much residual sexual behavior
is there after castration?
The more sexual experience before castration,
the more there is going to be retained afterward.
In other words, on a certain like totally artificial level,
this amount of sexual behavior is
being driven by testosterone.
This amount, which persists here,
is being driven by social experience.
It's got nothing to do with the hormones.
Yes, this is ridiculous dichotomizing
into this, but the fact that it doesn't go to zero,
and the fact that the more sexual experience
pre-castration, the more residual behavior, this
is a vote for just how much of a role
social experience, social conditioning plays.
Next thing that takes away from the yes,
it's all caused by testosterone--
now you do an elaboration on the study.
You castrate a male, and now instead
of replacing with 100% of normal levels,
you give 10% of normal levels, or you
give 200% of normal levels.
And what do you wind up seeing?
If testosterone plays a strictly causative role, even
in this range, you are going to get something--
this is going to be lower than 100%,
and this is going to be higher.
That's not what you see.
Instead, it is something like that.
You get roughly the same reinstatement
of sexual behavior when you return testosterone levels
over anything roughly approximating
the normal physiological range.
What does that tell you?
The brain circuits we learned about the other day involved
in sexual motivation-- it requires testosterone around
to work fully, not entirely, but to work fully.
But those brain regions are not really
all that concerned with the exact level of testosterone.
Rough approximation of normal, rough approximation of normal
has the exact same effect.
If you were seeing a tight relationship
in a male between the amount of sexual behavior
and testosterone levels, it's not
because every little smidgen bit of more testosterone
is going to drive more sexual behavior.
It's because every little additional smidgen of behavior
is going to drive higher testosterone levels.
So we've got this really important observation.
Yes, testosterone is needed in species after species,
including humans, for the normal range of sexual behavior.
Just as importantly, castration never drops it down to zero.
The more social experience, that whole song and dance,
and very importantly as well, the system
is not sensitive to little differences
in testosterone levels.
Stating that a different way, if some guy has
one and 1/2 percent more testosterone
on board than the guy sitting next to him
or than he had last week, is that going to mean he
is going to be more sexually motivated, more aroused?
No, not at all.
Within the normal range, the system doesn't distinguish it.
The relevant brain regions are sensitive to testosterone
and require it, but do not care a whole lot about the levels.
One exception, which is if you instead of, say,
200%, push testosterone levels like 1000%,
tenfold higher than normal, this is supraphysiological,
which means it's out of the normal range, which
means no bodies normally generate those sorts of levels.
Put it up in that range, and you will get an increase
in sexual behavior and sexual arousal.
When do you see this?
The idiots who go and abuse anabolic steroids
for their weight lifting or whatever, people doing that
are not pushing up their testosterone levels
into the higher range of what human bodies can generate.
They are pushing it way above the normal range.
In that range, you do see an increase
in sexual proceptivity.
In a week or so, what we will see is the exact same story.
It will be the exact same chart here when
asking the question, what does testosterone
have to do with aggression?
And what you'll see is the exact same conclusions.
What are we beginning to see here?
That testosterone is not playing a strictly causative role.
It is playing one of the words that
should be becoming repetitive here and clearly really
important.
Testosterone is playing a modulatory role.
What testosterone does is sensitize you
towards stimuli that are evocative of sexual arousal.
It lowers the threshold, and that
could be shown in all sorts of studies,
but where it's most clear cut is in this case.
Does testosterone cause this sexual behavior?
No, but when it is on board, it facilitates it.
It modulates it.
Theme again and again and again.
And that, obviously, has tons to do with individual differences.
One last hormone to mention in this realm of hormone levels
over the last couple of weeks, months, seasons,
or so-- the hormone melatonin.
And I think that's the only time melatonin is
going to be mentioned in class.
Melatonin has something to do with telling the body what time
of year it is.
It is responsive to the amount of light you are exposed to.
What is melatonin about?
It is one of the driving forces on seasonal mating.
Those species where you suddenly get on one afternoon
each year, all the wildebeests ovulate the same afternoon
kind of thing-- it is almost certainly
a whole pathway in the brain sensitive to the amount
of light and the amount of light per day over recent weeks,
which by way of melatonin, triggers
the onset of the mating season.
Do humans have a seasonal mating pattern?
There's a smidgen of evidence for it.
If we've got it, it is a very, very weak echo
of what you see in some other species.
Now we shift over to getting really way back then.
Instead of over your last 28 days
or over the last three seasons, now beginning to
look at perinatal factors.
Perinatal-- before birth.
Prenatal-- after birth.
Postnatal-- very early development.
First off, focusing on early environment,
environmental factors having something
to do with adult sexual behavior.
What we can translate that into is
ways in which early environment affects every single one
of these subsequent ones.
What does early environment childhood
have to do with shaping of sexual behavior?
A theme that's also going to come out in every topic
we're going to hear of after this, buzz words that
should be beginning to be keeping you awake at night--
modulatory, contingent, if then, all that stuff.
Here is another one.
Here's another concept that comes through.
The evidence shows that there is very little about early life
experience, which influences the quality,
the way in which an organism goes about having sex.
What's another way of stating it?
This is a pretty set in stone bunch of fixed action patterns.
Early experience is not about learning how to be sexual.
Early experience is about learning
the appropriate social contexts for being so.
And that is shown in species after species.
That is what experience is about.
Not how to do it, but when to do it
and who you should not in your right mind
try to do something proceptive to and things of that sort.
This is what early experience is about.
And what we're going to see in a week
is the exact same boring paragraph.
Early experience does not teach organisms how to be aggressive.
It teaches organisms the appropriate context
for being aggressive.
So what's the sort of evidence for these early effects?
One example, the whole literature
that emerged that is covered somewhat in the zebra
book in another domain, but this whole literature that emerged
in the 1950s, work looking at captive primates, what
are the consequences of growing up
in a certain degree of social isolation?
What happens to behavior-- and eventually, people
studying behavior and physiology-- what
happens to behavior in adulthood if you are a young rhesus
monkey, who grows up only with peers and no mother,
or grows up only with a mother and no peers,
or grows up with Mother being present
only intermittently, or at the most extremes, growing up
with neither mother nor peers or any other member
of your species around?
You will see in the book a whole discussion
of the ethics of these studies, but what
does your early social environment
have to do with things like sexual behavior?
And what you see coming out the end
is when you looked at these adult primates,
since replicated over and over, they
go about the sexual behavior the plain old way that everybody
else does, but they do it in totally socially
inappropriate context.
And thus, you have these males who
were raised in some degree of isolation early on,
growing up and carrying out perfectly normal
sexual fixed action patterns on the towel in the room,
on the bowl of food, on the who knows what wrong context.
You have trying to do things with animals you should not
go anywhere near in terms of social dominance
and such in appropriate context.
Early experience shaping not how but when,
what the if-then clauses are.
More issues of early experience shaping adult sexual behavior,
arousal, proceptivity, et cetera-- we
already heard one example of this with humans.
That's the whole kibbutz literature.
That was that whole business that if you
spend lots of intimate time with somebody before age six,
what you will do is in some subliminal imprinting way,
decide forever after this individual does not
feel like a potential mate.
This individual feels like a sibling.
That was the example in the recognizing relative lecture
of showing that hooray, we are such
a cognitively sophisticated species.
We can figure out who's somebody's fourth cousin three
steps removed by thinking, and that's
how we make our mating decisions, showing instead
in those studies, there is this non-conscious level.
One of the rules that humans have is lots of exposure
intimately to somebody early on in life,
and you are not going to be very likely to get
that proceptive behavior stuff going on later,
part of turning them into a pseudo kin because
of that early exposure.
One additional domain I will touch on here
in terms of early experience, which
is, what does early experience have
to do with sexual orientation?
And depending on which decade you are asking this question,
the answer would range from everything
to virtually nothing.
Going back to the virtually everything time, which
was dominating sort of the first half of the 20th century, how
people thought about the subject, what you had
were two broad models for what sort of early environments
increase the likelihood of boys becoming gay as adults.
And these were the two models.
The first one was the absence of a father figure model,
and this was one straight out of monkeys
learning who they should try to pelvic thrust
with or some such thing.
This was the argument that what do father figures provide?
Training for appropriate context for proceptive sexual behavior,
growing up absent a father, father figure,
increasing the likelihood of being gay.
The other model was having this totally pain in the neck
neurotic screwed up mother, who, as basically
said between the lines, makes you crazy when you grow up,
and thus you have circa 1950, psychiatrically certifiable
disorder of having a different sexual orientation.
Obviously, where I'm going to head right now
is there has not been a slightest shred of evidence
over the years either for the missing father figure
model of sexual orientation or the neurotic mothering style
model.
Complete nonsense.
Nonetheless, dominating thinking about what was going on there.
OK.
So what we are now ready to shift to
is what's going on with hormones around this time period.
Let's take our five-minute break, and then we'll resume.
Looking at what perinatal hormone levels have
to do with adult sexual behavior,
and you already know the answer.
You know it in your hearts by now,
which is, well, it depends on what species you're looking at.
And what we will see is a very similar thing to the rule
there, which is in lots of species,
rodent species, prenatal or perinatal hormonal environment
has everything to do with adult sexual behavior.
And by the time we get to humans,
what we'll see is maybe kind of sort of more research needed.
What we begin with here, implicit in that,
is a dichotomy that runs through all of endocrinology
when thinking about behavior.
The effects of hormones back when you were little,
jargon in the field, an organizational effect
of the hormone.
And what that is about is explicitly
is what are hormones doing at a time in terms
of organizing what kind of brain you're developing there.
Effects of hormones, instead, in this range or so,
what you are talking about is an activational hormonal effect.
So this is a very sort of consistent dichotomy
that people in the business use, early, early hormonal
environments having organizational effects
on the nervous system, hormones forever
after having activational effects.
So what you see is in rodent species
that perinatal hormone exposure has
massive organizational effects that dramatically
influence sexual behavior.
What you also see is it's not so dramatic and clear cut.
A whole literature initially suggesting that,
for example, male rodents, if they are not
exposed to testosterone, perinatally,
will have a different male rodent sexual orientation later
on, a dichotomous outcome.
What a huge literature now shows is
something that is evident to every sort of human sexologist
for centuries, which is it's not a dichotomous function.
It is on a continuum in terms of sexual orientation,
and 300 different species have been documented by now
to have both heterosexual and homosexual behavior
at different times in naturalistic settings.
So perinatal hormones having organizing effects
on adult sexual orientation-- what you see
is these are not all or none properties at all.
What else?
OK.
What you see specifically in non-human primates
is perinatal period.
Expose a female monkey fetus to high testosterone levels,
and what you will do is masculinize the brain.
Masculinize the brain, having, thus, an organizational effect.
What does masculinization then manifest itself
as in adulthood?
If nothing else is different, it has no effects at all.
On the other hand, if you inject a female monkey who
is masculinized perinatally, if you inject her with androgens,
with testosterone, you get a wild burst of male fixed action
patterns.
In other words, you've got an if-then clause.
If and only if there was prenatal masculinization,
then testosterone will have an acute activational effect
on sexual behavior.
Translating this.
OK.
So in the absence in a normal female monkey,
in the absence of prenatal androgens or adult androgen
levels, this is the amount of male fixed action
pattern sexual behavior.
Now prenatal androgenization-- normal low action levels
in adulthood.
Same low levels.
Now no prenatal androgenization, and exposure to androgens
in adulthood-- same low levels.
Prenatal exposure and acute activational effects,
and suddenly, you get high rates of male typical fixed action
patterns.
So what we've got here is a contingent organizational
effect.
Yet again, one of our if-then clauses, this one
not being an if this physiology is going on only
in this social environment, then if this early life endocrine
environment occurs coupled with this acute adult one, then.
Yeah, question.
[INAUDIBLE]?
That is a great question, and as you're about to see,
the answer is so insanely complicated, you
are going to regret having asked that question for days.
But you are going to find out about it anyway.
Apropos of that, I just forgot a great question
during the break, which is, OK, when you've
got those weightlifter folks, they're
abusing their steroids, their anabolic steroids,
their testosterone-derived drugs, when you push things up
into the supraphysiological range,
higher than the body normally ever comes up with,
do you see a phenomenon from last Wednesday?
Does the body down regulate the number
of testosterone receptors?
And you see exactly the case, but you could never down
regulate them low enough to compensate
for the huge screaming testosterone signal.
It is a partially successful compensatory response.
What have you got in terms of humans,
in terms of perinatal androgenization of females?
And people used to know exactly the answer to it.
First off, when do you get human females as fetuses
and as predominately in humans prenatal, rather than
postnatal effects?
It depends on how fast, how much of development
occurs before birth, but in humans,
when are circumstances where female fetuses will
get heavily androgenized?
Historically, two circumstances.
One is in the case of a disease where
there is something wrong with the adrenal glands,
and they pump out tons of testosterone.
You remember, if I actually did say this,
and if I didn't, I hope you're not remembering it
hallucinatorily, but you'll remember
that the adrenal glands make a certain amount of testosterone,
and in females, it pumps out maybe 5%
the levels that males do.
When you have this disease of an overactive adrenal system,
you pump out way too high of levels of testosterone,
a disease called congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Hyperplasia, the number of cells-- OK,
come up with a limerick about that one.
I dare you.
Is it possible to come up with a haiku?
How many syllables are there in congenital adrenal hyperplasia?
Well, it depends if we're talking about rodents or not.
So congenital adrenal hyperplasia,
a genetic and inborn error of metabolism in the adrenal
glands, and you pump out huge amounts of androgen.
So suddenly, there is a world of the occasional girl, who
was born suffering from this disorder or the mother
suffering from it during pregnancy, who has
been prenatally androgenized.
The other population, thanks to a drug that
was very popular in the 1950s, a drug that decreased
the likelihood of miscarriage that was very heavily used
at points around then, a drug called diethylstilbestrol, DES.
And in a subset of women, their biochemistry
was such that a lot of the DES was converted to androgens.
So you had kids, who were prenatally androgenized, girls,
either because of this congenital adrenal hyperplasia
or because of DES exposure.
So then the question immediately becomes, OK,
so what are they like afterward?
And this prompted the great, large, massive set
of studies on the CAH, the congenital adrenal hyperplasia,
on the CAH girls as they grow up,
and you knew exactly what the expectation was straight
out of primates here, non-human primates, which
was this was going to have masculinizing effects
on their behavior.
And what was shown was in adulthood,
there were all sorts of differences.
No, not just in adulthood.
Starting around adolescence, there
were all sorts of differences in the behaviors of these girls,
and as we'll see next week, a whole cluster of them
were thought to fall into the realm of aggressive behavior.
But what we're seeing here was eventually,
a higher likelihood of becoming a lesbian
in terms of sexual orientation.
Whoa.
What we've just shown is prenatal androgens,
and you produce a lesbian later on.
That's just-- there's a little problem with these studies,
a slight confound, and one that's
going to be very pertinent next week
as well when talking about the aggression stuff.
The confound being if you were prenatally androgenized,
you would get born with kind of weirdo genitals,
and you would have sort of intersexual genitals
in all sorts of ways.
And all of these girls typically had
to have gone through a dozen rounds
of reconstructive plastic surgery
over the first decade of your life.
These were not girls where the only thing different about them
was what sort of hormones their brains were marinating
in back when they were fetuses.
These are girls who grow up with this really interesting part
of the body that all sorts of people
seem kind of creeped out about, but doctors are endlessly
examining, and all sorts of painful surgeries.
And this literature was completely
confounded by the fact that there
was all this masculinization of genitalia and a whole world
of surgeries, often confusion about gender assignment
early on in life.
Things were not merely a change in the hormone levels.
So it remains relatively unclear.
There is by now, at this point, weak evidence
of prenatal androgenization increasing
the likelihood of a woman being gay as an adult.
I'm seeing here in my notes I have the words Indonesia,
tomboy, and Hobson Jobson.
And I haven't a clue what that's about.
So we will just skip over that.
OK.
What we begin to see here is another feature
of early experience.
What does-- where were we-- prenatal endocrine environment
have to do with sexual identification?
Which is different than who you are sexually attracted,
but rather what sex you feel yourself to be.
And what we heard the other day with the transsexualism example
is you could have gender being dictated by your chromosomes
and which organ, which types of gonads you have
and hormones and all of that, but that is not
enough to determine that there are clearly other things that
can happen that could produce a very, very different gender
identity.
What also was seen from that literature of individuals
who were born intersexual where they have sexually ambiguous,
gender ambiguous genitalia is it is far from clear
which decision to make, whether that
was made circa 1950s by the surgeon
with no consultation with the parents,
or, fortunately, these days, a very different scenario
in terms of how successful the assignment is
by the individuals in the outside world.
What's going on in terms of sexual identity inside?
Now what this begins to bring up is the most miserable,
irritating, confusing thing about the effects
of steroid hormones in the brain, which is
where your question came from.
And this is where you're all going to start to regret this,
but it actually is necessary in terms of an important point.
So you've got testosterone, and what does testosterone do?
We know already it binds to testosterone receptors,
testosterone receptor, and does its steroid hormone
transcription factor deal.
Throughout the 1970s, there was an astonishing amount
of confusing irritative research done showing the two following
things.
In some parts of the body, testosterone
has its effect as testosterone.
It binds to the testosterone receptor.
In some parts of the body, there is biochemical conversion
of testosterone to something called dihydrotestosterone.
OK.
It's not testosterone.
It's a little bit different chemically.
It binds to the same testosterone receptors.
It works a little bit differently.
OK, we can live with that.
The thing that had people jumping off buildings
was the discovery at the time that some
of testosterone's actions are due to it being biochemically
converted to estrogen, which then binds
to estrogen receptors and causes male typical behaviors.
OK.
It's at this point that about half the people in the field
quit and went to business school,
because this was so confusing and impossible and all of that.
This consumed years of labor of people
trying to sort this one out.
It goes as follows.
Once testosterone enters a target cell,
if this is the scenario that's going to happen,
it's inside the cell.
The testosterone is turned to estrogen. In other words,
this weirdo phenomenon has no effect on circulating
testosterone levels.
It's only in target cells that have the enzyme that
could do that conversion.
OK.
So it's an intracellular phenomenon.
If this is leaving you totally in the dust,
don't worry about it, except for a small point coming in awhile.
But if you want to devote the rest of your life
to figuring this out in more detail,
there is something wrong with you.
But what you've got here is normal
circulating levels, but different effects
throughout the body.
In general, what is found is the effects of testosterone
in the brain involve this turning into estrogen,
as symbolized meaninglessly by that asterisk.
Throughout the genitals or throughout the body,
and secondary sexual areas of skin and such,
testosterone exerts its effects by being turned
into dihydrotestosterone.
And whatever parts are left over at that point,
testosterone just does its regular old thing.
So this is incredibly confusing how this can be.
Immediately, or not so immediately, two things
should come to mind.
OK, so prenatal testosterone levels
are going about their normal prenatal
organizational masculinization effects, and part of it
is on how the brain organizes.
So what we just saw was prenatal neurobiological masculinization
requires testosterone to be working
like estrogen in the brain.
Why don't all the female fetuses then get androgenized?
Since they're not generating estrogen right on site there
within the cell, but they're getting estrogen
through some other route as their fetal ovaries
start to work.
Why isn't mom and her estrogen androgenizing
every single fetus out there?
How is it possible to ever get a female?
And the answer to that is there is
a protein, which occurs during pregnancy,
that occurs in the circulation.
And what it does is it binds estrogen,
and it takes it out of action.
It leads to estrogen being degraded.
In other words, estrogen in the bloodstream of a fetus
never has an effect on any cells in the body.
Estrogen, whether derived from the female fetus beginning
to get her ovaries going there, or from mom's circulation,
the estrogen has no effect.
And in other words, the only fetuses
that ever have estrogen inside their neurons
are fetuses that are male, where the estrogen came
from testosterone.
So you have to have this protein,
and it's something called alpha fetoprotein.
It only occurs in fetal life.
This winds up being the solution.
What is implicit in that, you do not
get the organizational feminizing effects of hormones
prenatally because of estrogen, because you've just
guaranteed that doesn't happen.
You're getting androgenizing effects that way.
You don't get prenatal feminizing effects
from estrogen. Where does the brain feminization come from?
The irritating answer back when was
this was always-- sort of the same phrase
was always used that the female brain is a default brain.
You have to actively in a muscular excited chopping down
the trees and clearing the prairie sort of way,
you have to actively do something hormonal
to masculinize a brain.
And in the absence of that, you just kind of wind up
with one of them female brains.
What's clear now is this default model was not really the case.
It's other hormones that are doing that there.
OK.
So this totally confusing, irritating thing
that everybody had to assimilate at the time of testosterone
having different effects, having been converted
to different messengers in different parts of the body,
and that having to produce this whole complex Rube Goldberg
sort of solution as to how to ever get a female.
Now one additional interesting implication--
back to, you remember the other week, remember-- actually,
did I talk about it, or was it two years ago?
Jeez.
OK.
I think I mentioned testicular feminized males.
Yes.
Good.
OK.
Thank you for the grounding.
You remember when those folks were about.
This was someone who was phenotypically a girl
and would not hit puberty, would not
start menstruating until every other kid in her grade
had, and it still hasn't happened,
still hasn't happened.
And you take her to the doctor, and what is discovered
is that she is not female.
She is a testicular feminized male,
and we went through exactly what the building
blocks were of that.
The individual is chromosomally male,
has testes, undescended testes, is producing
tons and tons of testosterone.
What was the problem there?
We knew already it was the mutation
in the testosterone receptor.
So if testosterone is not able to send
a signal through the testosterone receptor,
you don't get a male phenotype, and you
get an individual whose sexual identity is female,
because these are people who are girls
and grow up to become women, women
who simply can't reproduce.
But otherwise, the sexual identification is female.
This should be really puzzling now,
because what we've just seen is if you
have this mutation in the testosterone receptor,
you're not going to get any signaling mediated
by testosterone.
You're not going to get any signaling mediated
by dihydrotestosterone.
But you're going to get perfectly normal
masculinization of the brain by way
of estrogen. In other words, people
who were testicular feminized males, who
in terms of their sex identification,
have been female from day one and will be
for their entire lives, nonetheless, prenatally
they had masculinization organizational effects
on the brain.
What does that tell you?
All of this great hormone stuff, in some cases,
doesn't hold a candle to social sex identity assignment, which
is when you have somebody growing up
with a certain gender's genitals, and all of you
treat that individual as a girl.
It turns out virtually 100% of the time,
it doesn't matter that you still had this pathway working
prenatally.
All the social cueing produces a female sexual identity.
So we've just gotten a big, big vote here for this.
It's doing all sorts of exciting endocrine stuff there,
which nonetheless, may not hold a candle
to some social environmental factors at this end.
OK.
What else do we have here?
Something I don't want to talk about.
OK.
So hurtling on, now we are ready to move back another box here,
which is genetics.
What does the genetic makeup up of an individual, not of
a population or species, what do genes
have to do with sexual behavior?
And the answer is lots of things, starting with the fact
that genes determine which gonads you make as a fetus.
And thus, that determines which sex hormones
you were secreting, and thus, that
determines what sort of genitals you wind up with
and secondary sexual stuff, and off you go running with that.
And we've seen that nonetheless, that can be blunted by,
depending on the environment, the testicular feminized
male pathway here showing that.
So genes play a role in terms of just sheer sex determination.
What is known about genes and sexual orientation?
This has been studied a lot, because this
is one of those irresistible subjects
that, ooh, people just can't get enough of.
What's up with that?
What does the literature show?
A certain degree of heritability of sexual orientation, and you
should be able to leap up right now and say exactly what that
means and doesn't mean.
Here's the sort of evidence.
Twin studies, twin studies-- when
you look at monozygotic twins, identical twins,
there's approximately 50% concordance
of sexual orientation.
Translated into the terms that people are usually
focusing on in those studies, which is to say,
if somebody is gay, their identical twins
has a 50% chance of being gay.
Dizygotic twins, non-identical twins-- what is the number?
Instead it's 22% covariance.
What's the number with other siblings?
9% covariance.
So what do we see here?
We see a suggestion that the more genes you
have in common with somebody, but also the more prenatal
environment you had with your non-identical twin, all
of that stuff, the greater the likelihood of sharing
a trait of sexual orientation.
And you can be off and running right now about the limitations
of that interpretation, because obviously, this
suggests genetic effects, and it also
suggests the whole world of identical twins being treated
differently than non-identical ones.
One additional piece in that story, and this
was another one of those front page stories in Time, Newsweek,
et cetera, and this came a couple of years
after Simon Levey's finding of that sexually dimorphic nucleus
in the brain, that whole deal there.
And this was the reporting of the first genetic markers
for sexual orientation.
And this was reported by a geneticist
at National Institute of Health, a guy
named Dean Hamer, who was a very well-respected geneticist.
And what he reported was that he was finding genetic markers
for sexual orientation.
In other words, certain gene locations that
were more likely to be shared between gay siblings, where
both were gay, than between partially
gay siblings or non-gay siblings or however that one runs.
You know that one by now.
Beginning to find genetic markers going with this.
This was really interesting, and no surprise--
what the newspapers were screaming about within days
was scientists announced today they
have discovered the gay gene.
Great.
Maybe we shouldn't let people learn any science out there.
So scientists have discovered the gay gene.
It goes to all the newspapers and Reader's Digest,
and if I recall at the time, Ronald Reagan as well,
but he was completely demented at that point,
so I won't hold it against him.
But the people at Newsweek should have known better.
So we have cover stories about the gay gene.
Obviously, you can rip this to shreds right now.
Number one, this was not a gene.
This was a genetic marker.
You remember the other week, the difference there.
Number two, there was no consistency in this.
What do I mean by this?
This pair of identical twins would
tend to share a certain genetic marker, which was predictive
of sexual orientation.
And the next pair over, it wasn't the same area of genes
that showed that covariance.
It would be a completely different area
that they had in common.
In another pair, a completely different area,
you got this genetic covariance in various twin pairs,
but it wasn't the same gene marker in all those cases.
All of them were different, which
makes zero sense in terms of the genetics.
The biggest problem with it is that since then, all sorts
of people have tried to replicate the finding,
and it has never been replicated.
Nonetheless, Hamer became quite famous for this.
He is gay, and he used this sort of politically some
of the same ways that Simon Levey did with his study, which
is, don't tell me about choice.
Don't tell me about my neurotic mother anymore.
We are looking at a very hard wired biological trait-- what
sexual orientation you have.
Levey's finding I have found quite convincing
in terms of replications.
Hamer's-- nobody else has replicated any actual genetics
that he reported.
Makes no sense at all.
So great limitations in what you could make of this.
OK.
This allows us to make our great final leap to the left
with this thing, this logic that's
going to run through everything we talk about,
which is the second you're talking about genes,
you are implicitly talking about the evolutionary history
that brought about the existence of those genes.
And that you're also talking about the proteins made
by those genes and early environment changing
the epigenetic state of transcribing those genes.
Yes, yes, that whole song and dance now.
So now we have to transition to, what does evolutionary biology
tell us about sexual behavior?
So the first thing that it tells us is absolutely obvious, which
is organisms have sex for the good of the species.
So that one's out of the way.
So now we go to what is much more logically in terms
of contemporary, evolutionary thinking-- contemporary
starting circa 1965 or so-- the whole notion
of maximizing the number of copies of your own genes,
all of that translated into sort of the economic terms
of [INAUDIBLE] copies of genes.
What that basically states is sexual behavior
is about reproduction.
And people who would study phenomena
like these in various rodent species
or wildebeest ovulating the same afternoon, all of that,
would say, yes, indeed, you only have sexual behavior
when it's around the time when females are ovulating and yes.
Reproductive behavior is about reproduction.
It's about passing on copies of genes.
What soon began to fall apart was not only making sense of us
with our having non-reproductive sex all sorts of times,
was the discovery that we're not the only species that
does that.
And far and away the flagship species
as a sort of emblem of that are bonobo chimps,
who are, according to almost all primatologists out there,
the coolest primate species there is.
OK.
Bonobo chimps-- they were historically
known as pygmy chimps, which is to say that when people first
discovered them in terms of scientists,
they were viewed as, well, these are chimps,
but they're just kind of weirdo atrophied chimps, which
I don't quite know how you come up
with a pygmy atrophied chimp, but that was the view.
And not very interesting-- what eventually became clear
is they are a separate species of chimp,
and bonobo chimps are utterly different
from your standard issue Jane Goodall chimps.
Again, Jane Goodall chimps, we have a tournament species
with extreme high levels of male aggression.
As we will hear about next week, you
have chimps who are building weapons.
You have chimps that form something
resembling organized warfare, and meanwhile,
over, as it turned out, on the other side of the Congo,
which is where the main division occurs,
you only find bonobos in one area of the Congo basin,
and they clearly have been reproductively isolated
from all the rest of the chimps heading there
east all the way to the Indian Ocean by way of the Congo.
There, go on the other side of the river.
You've got the bonobos, and bonobos are totally different.
Bonobos, unlike chimps, have virtually no sexual dimorphism,
so you're off and running with that one.
We know exactly what that means.
Bonobo chimps have female dominance rather than male.
All bonobo chimps play the guitar and sing soulfully.
What else?
And we have astonishing amounts of sex.
Wait a second.
We just went off the rails here.
A species with low degrees of aggression, because they
have virtually no aggression whatsoever, species
with low degree of aggression and with no sexual dimorphism
in body size-- what we're looking at
is a pair bonding species, a monogamous species.
Bonobos are not a monogamous species.
Bonobos make-- I don't know who-- look like a pair bonding
species by comparison.
Bonobos are the most sexually promiscuous species on Earth.
Bonobos have astonishing amounts of sex
with every other type of bonobo they could run into.
They have sex in order to reproduce.
They have sex in order to decrease tensions.
They have sex in order to celebrate
having decreased tensions.
They have sex, because it's an even numbered day of the month,
because this is odd.
Every variety, and the vast majority
of it being non-reproductive, non-reproductive
because it's not at a time when anybody's ovulating,
or because it's with someone of the same sex,
or it involves sexual behavior, which traditionally does not
result in eggs getting fertilized and all sorts
of variants that people only dream about
from buying books and trying to get
lessons and this sort of thing.
And you have, perhaps, having something
to do with that astonishingly limber spinal columns,
but what you've got is a totally different picture.
Wait a second.
They are very low aggression, and they
have no sexual dimorphism, but they're as far
from pair bonding as you can get.
And instead, you have a highly promiscuous social system,
female-dominated, and they're all
just so cool and wonderful you can't believe it.
And every time people go to primatology meetings,
if you study some dumb old stupid species like a baboon,
you spend the whole time basically feeling
like you're some sort of immature jerk,
because you're not hanging out with bonobos.
They are the kings of primatologists these days,
the people who study bonobos.
As the soundbite goes, chimpanzees are from Mars.
Bonobos are from Venus.
OK.
So that's what the t-shirts say from the bonobo people
at the conferences there.
Totally different system.
So what we already see is violating our simple rules
of what predicts a tournament species
and what predicts a pair bonding one.
What's most striking here is [INAUDIBLE]
reproductive behavior is reproduction
for passing on copies of the genes,
not for the good of the species.
But we know individual selection could [INAUDIBLE].
And here's these guys having sex with 14 other bonobos
while they're all upside down or who knows what,
and it's not just for passing on numbers of copies of genes.
Huge, huge exception there.
And huge exception in lots of other species.
And the ecologist Joan Roughgarden
here in the biology department has
made an argument there is far more non-reproductive sex that
goes on in lots of different species,
weakening the classic Darwinian concept from three,
four weeks ago of sexual selection
being a very important driving force.
What sex is very heavily about is one gender choosing
who are going to mate with the other one,
and it's all driven by that of seeing instead
if the world of bonobos, there's not
a whole lot of evolutionary drive being built around sex
equals reproduction.
So bonobos are really interesting.
What's the sex there about?
One of the common themes that comes through
is it's about promoting group cohesion,
and one of the things that people emphasize or focus on
with bonobos is you look at all sorts of other primate species,
and what do they do when they're upset about something?
They groom each other.
What do they do when they're happy?
They groom.
What do they do-- social grooming,
as termed the social glue, the social lubricant of a society.
You get a troop of baboons that have just
gotten a bad scare from a lion, and as soon
as the coast is clear, everybody comes down
and spends the next 30 minutes grooming each other.
And sexual behavior in bonobos appears
to be serving a very similar role--
all about social cohesion as well as decreasing
individual tensions, reconciliation,
things of that sort.
Now this flies on the face of a dominant theory that was around
in the last century, the first part of it,
and this was due to one of the grand poobahs
in this field, a guy, this Brit named Solly Zuckerman.
Solly Zuckerman, who eventually became Sir Solly Zuckerman,
which probably didn't help him in society at all
still despite that, but old Zuckerman there
was, for his time, the embarrassed Wynne Edwards.
He was the Lamarck of the earliest
part of the 20th century.
The people who will only be remembered
for coming up with Lamarckianism, old Lamarck
or coming up with something as idiotic as group selection.
What Zuckerman came up with was the notion
that sexual behavior is purely for promoting group cohesion
and for decreasing violence.
And all you need to do is go to half the movies out there
or study half the species on Earth,
and what you will see is sexual behavior or inability of
or unrequited or whatever vanquished
is the cause of the majority of aggression in organisms
out there in various mammals, and that argues
very strongly against it.
So what you see in most species that have been studied--
it's a strong argument against the Zuckerman stance.
Nonetheless, you see in some species like bonobos
and Roughgarden's argument, lots more species
than people traditionally would think,
where instead you see sexual behavior often serving
a non-reproductive group cohesion sort of role.
What else does evolution have to tell us about sexual behavior?
One critical issue and one that was touched
on the first couple of lectures is, what does it
cost you to reproduce?
And there we get the hugely important asymmetry,
which is sperm don't cost a whole lot, whereas eggs
and pregnancy and postnatal care and all of that
is hugely expensive.
What is that the driving force on
according to all the sociobiological thinking?
The fact that in species after species after species,
females are more selective about who
they will mate with than males, and it's usually
the case the males are not selective in the slightest.
And what you've got instead is just
a couple of sperm that accost you, and that's not a big deal.
Increased female selectivity, higher levels of it than males,
argument being that it is all about the differential
costs of pregnancy.
What we also saw was not of pregnancy,
but of reproduction and raising of kids.
What we saw was the interesting realm
where you got the exception to that, which
were the pair bonding species.
The marmosets, for example, and what we saw back
when was the male does as much child care as the female
does, and the females always twin.
So around the time that the kids are born,
the female has put in far more of the investment.
She's gone through the pregnancy in terms
of caloric expenditure.
The males do, if anything, more of the child rearing
in terms of carrying the kid around when foraging,
all sorts of costly stuff like that, and eventually,
what you see is the curves don't do that.
But at some point, the cumulative amount
of calories that the male has expended
is greater than the female.
That's when you see that cuckoldry business.
That's where females will potentially
pick up and abandon, and because the male has made the greater
investment at that point, that is seen very frequently in bird
species with pair bonding.
So we've got here an exception to the argument
that the cost of reproduction and child raising
is always greater for females and, thus, will always
produce greater female pickiness for mates
than you find in males.
Nonetheless, you see that an awful lot.
What else do you see?
A whole world not only of female pickiness,
but a whole world of male attempts
to control female reproductive behavior.
And this found in species after species after species
an obvious interpretation there in terms
of male-male competition decreasing
the ability of females to mate with someone else.
And that ranges from primates who
are in consortships, where the male will do what is often
termed mate guarding, which is he tries
to keep the female from going near any other guy
to all sorts of other stuff as well.
And you certainly see this in the human realm.
What are two cultural inventions humans have come up with
to decrease the likelihood-- by men-- to decrease
the likelihood of women being sexually active
outside that relationship?
The first one is clitoridectomies,
and something else that serves a very similar function, which
is inventions of things like chastity belts.
What's up with that?
What you find are cultural inventions
like those in groups that tend to have occupations where males
disappear for long periods.
For example, nomadic pastoralists,
where depending on the time of year,
you pick up with your camels or your cows or whatever,
and you, the guy, are going to spend the next three
weeks at the grazing area that's a good five miles
west of there.
And what this is about-- the argument culturally
for the clitoridectomies is it decreases female pleasure,
decreases the likelihood of her having sex with someone
else when you were elsewhere.
What were chastity belts about when
the guy picked up and decided to spend the next six years trying
to liberate Jerusalem from the Ottomans
or whatever off in the Crusades?
And just so you don't have any ideas over the next half decade
while I go die from the plague somewhere in Eastern Europe,
that's when those were, again, a model of cultures
where there were extended periods
of men being away from women.
You have very often elaborate cultural inventions
for men trying to control the reproductive access of women.
What that also winds up doing is explaining
what was thought to be the dominant models
of reproductive success and reproductive choice
in all sorts of other species.
And seen, for example, in something
like baboons, what you had was termed the linear access
model of reproduction.
It goes as follows.
You have a social group-- for example,
a baboon social group-- and there
is only one female who is in estrus, only one female who
is ovulating.
Who winds up mating with her?
The alpha male in the troop.
Now instead, there's two females who were ovulating.
Who gets the two females?
Numbers one and two in the hierarchy.
Three females-- numbers one, two, and three get the female.
And implicit in that is the activeness implied in the word
"get," the passive lack of choice
at the female end of things.
This was the linear access model in which male dominance
rank was entirely predictive of male reproductive success.
So that's what people thought lots about then.
That was the original thinking about the relationship
between male dominance rank and reproductive success.
As we will see shortly, it's not quite so clear.
Lots of other species, where you see males attempting
in the evolutionary sense, attempting
to limit female access to other males--
this is the whole world of copulatory plugs.
Lots of dog canine related species, where a semen plug is
left there in the vagina of the female, which
soon hardens into a plug like nothing else
is happening there.
You see that.
There are other cases.
There are fly species where the males penis is barbed,
and ooh, I heard a-- I'm not drawing that.
What are you thinking?
Where it's barbed and where the barbs, in fact,
go in the opposite direction, point back at the male.
Once you get the penis in there, and it's not coming out again.
It's like one of those-- you put your--
[LAUGHTER]
Well, it's actually not like one of those,
but you get the point.
And what's that about?
The male leaves his penis in there,
which he manages to do without afterward,
because they can make new ones.
And this is a very different world you've got here.
Then you've got the whole world we've already heard about about
sperm competition, of sperm from one male in various fly species
containing toxins that will kill the sperm of another male.
Then there's a whole interesting world
that goes on, which is when males mate with a female,
they do something biochemically, which
decreases the sexual attractiveness
of the female subsequent to that.
In a number of fly species, males with mating
release a chemical, which decreases mating pheromone
production in the female.
And suddenly, nobody else is interested in her,
or there are other flies species where
males release a chemical, which decreases sexual proceptivity
in the female.
Viciously clever ways for males to control
female reproductive behavior after they've left.
Male-male competitive strategies.
So what do you see at the female end of things?
No surprise, you see female counterstrategies.
One brilliant one that evolved in humans
is this relatively unique human phenomenon of hidden ovulation.
Yes, all that pheromone stuff and smelling people's
armpits and things that don't happen much in the real world,
but what you see for the most part is that humans are not
terribly aware of where somebody is in their cycle.
Humans have invented hidden ovulation.
What's that meant to do?
Decrease paternity certainty.
And one argument is that's a good mechanism
for decreasing the likelihood of competitive infanticide.
The other is it decreases male attempt
to control female sexual behavior,
because it's less clear when you need to be doing that.
So counterstrategies.
More examples-- this is argued that in some species that
have non-reproductive sex throughout the cycle, that
is a female counterstrategy to, again, fool the male when
ovulation is actually occurring, increasing the likelihood that
at such times, she can get somebody else's genes.
Other strategies-- we've already heard about one-- [INAUDIBLE]
in the competitive infanticide one, which
is that whole world of females that can fake being in estrus,
that go through pseudo estrus, all of this
meant to be ways of keeping males a little bit less certain
of when they should be trying to control female sexual access,
and thus, she has more choice in the matter.
What that brings us to is thus-- oh,
that's something interesting that I left out.
Eh, it's not that interesting.
OK.
So back to male-male competition.
This was first looking at male in lots of species,
male attempts to regulate female sexual behavior,
female counterstrategies.
What's up with male-male competition
in terms of evolution and sexual behavior?
Most obvious one being is male-male competition
for reproductive access and the standard old models
being that linear access model-- one female winds up with number
one male, two, and so on.
What that thus begins to explain is
when you look at all social species out there,
the leading cause of aggression is male-male aggression
built around female access.
And as we'll see by next week, that
is the case as well for every human culture ever looked at.
You also see, of course, the sperm competition.
And once again, we have one of those issues
with humans, which is where do we fit on the spectrum there?
If you have a monogamous species,
males tend to produce only small amounts of sperm
and tend to have small testes.
When you have polygamous species,
males want to pump out insane amounts of sperm
to increase the likelihood of outcompeting some other guy's
sperm if it shows up on the scene
or for making a sperm plug, and what you wind up getting there
in those species are large testes.
So you look at the various primates,
and chimps have gigantic testicles per body size.
Gorillas do not.
Gorillas that have a very different world
of male-male com-- what about humans?
Once again, the same exact thing.
We are about halfway in between.
When compared to other primates, we
are intermediate between a tournament species and a pair
bonding species in yet another domain.
We've been hearing about this again and again.
Something really interesting that has
been shown in humans, which is-- no, I'm not going to tell that.
That's too hard to explain.
But it was great.
You would really wish-- so now what we have is also
looking at evolutionary aspects of female choice in there,
and in what cases do you get female-female competition?
First off, the answer was obvious in terms
of looking at traditional tournament species, which
is that females have no choice who they are mating with.
It's linear access models.
One female winds up with the alpha male, two females
and so on, and this was the dominant model
in all of primatology starting in the '60s.
And then by around 1980 or so, it
was recognized that, in fact, there's
virtually no evidence for strict linear access
models of the main determinant of who a female mates with is
who's the winner of male-male competitive interactions.
People discovered at the time that, in fact, there
was this strange, strange violation of all these models,
because it turned out the models were not based on behavior.
And this generally was discovered around that time,
because that was around the time that the majority
of primatologists on earth suddenly became
female and started looking at the female end of things
and discovered that this linear access stuff is not,
in fact, what occurs.
And out of that came a completely shocking concept
that ran through primatology like a bolt of lightning--
the notion that there was-- this is the technical term--
some degree of female choice.
Oh, whoa.
That's kind of bizarre, where females have something
to do with who they mate with.
And there's been a whole world of primatology studies
since then showing what female choice is about.
First off, how does female choice
occur in a typical tournament species?
You've got this problem.
With primates, for example, you wind up with a pair bond,
with a consortship between a male and an ovulating female,
and because it's a tournament species,
the male is twice the size or has
big huge canines or whatever stuff he's got there.
He is physically able to dominate the female
quite readily.
You do not see female choice in those cases being exerted
by the female beating up on the guy
and her getting to go mate with who she's interested in.
What you see is much more clever behavior
on the part of the female.
She will, for example, exhaust the guy.
Every time he sits down to feed, the female
gets up and starts walking.
And he has to jump up and pile together the picnic
and go running after her.
Every time he tries to take a nap, she goes walking.
Or what you find with baboons is the most clever thing
that females do is they go walk and leave the male right
in front of his worst rival, or then
they'll do it again and again and again
and get the guy totally harried out and crazed,
and at some point, those two males will have a fight.
And what then happens is she runs off to the bushes
and has what is technically called
a stolen copulation with the guy she's actually interested in.
Maybe it's not so bad to be a female baboon.
So now what this brings us to insofar
as this alternative female strategy is available,
we now come to this absolutely critical question,
one that is run through the ages, which is,
what do female baboons want?
Who do they want to mate with?
And people are not positive, but there
is some suggestion in the data.
It needs to be replicated more.
There is this trend, but there's this suggestion
that female baboons like to mate with male baboons, who
are nice to them.
No, are they sure?
Are they certain?
Have they done their statistics right?
They go, and they mate with guys who groom them a lot,
guys who play with their infants,
guys who, when they're in a bad mood, don't beat up on them
but beat up on somebody else.
This counts as a prince of the male baboon.
This is someone you take home to meet mom.
When he's in a bad mood, he pummels someone else, not me.
This is someone you want to mate with.
And in the mid 1980s, excellent primatologist Barbara Smuts
of University of Michigan came up
with the very jargony scientific term
that all sorts of non-human primates
have intersexual friendships.
And that's not an anthropomorphic term.
What it was though was people sort
of snickering at it in that the initial notion was
that these were just friends.
These were platonic monkey relationships.
They were not about reproduction,
and it was not until people got good enough and enough data
to start picking up on all those stolen copulations
to see that the females were picking up
and mating with their nice guy-- oh, we're just friends.
I could never see him-- whoa, and they're suddenly
in the bushes with him.
And it suddenly turned from the, yeah, nice guys finish last.
OK, they do lots of grooming, but let's count the number
of copies of genes, to becoming apparent
that the being a nice guy was a viable alternative reproductive
strategy as long as there was this thing of female choice.
And what the paternity studies began to show
was that was a very viable alternative strategy, in part,
because you're not mating anywhere near as
much if you were a low ranking affiliative male.
With a female, you're not mating anywhere near as much
as the high ranking males, but you're not burning out.
You're not getting injured.
You're not having the male-male fighting.
You live a lot longer, and this keeps happening.
There's a problem, though, which is
suppose you are a female baboon, and you
want to mate with this nice guy, and one
of the things that he's nice about
is he's nice to your kid, who's now
about three or four years old.
And there's a very good chance that where
that affiliative relationship started
with him got jump started was the fact that he was the most
likely father of that kid and has developed somewhat
of an affiliative relationship with the kid
and hangs out with them and hangs out with you.
And so you've established this is
a nice guy I want to mate with.
But there's a problem, which was if he
was the likely father of your now
three, four-year-old offspring, the odds
are that three, four years ago, he
was a pretty high ranking male.
And what that means now three, four years later
is he's likely to be some aging guy over the hill, whose
rank has been dropping.
In other words, not someone who is
going to be very effective at male-male competition,
and you get this horrible sort of tension
there going on between the male-male competitive world
generates some Arnold Schwarzenegger jerk,
who's the one who's supposed to be where she wants to mate
with Alan Alda or whoever.
And what you have then is he's not
up to the male-male competitive stuff,
because he's some aging guy.
And you instead have the world of stolen copulations.
So isn't that great?
Isn't that heartwarming?
A whole world of what are now called alternative strategies.
If you're some scheming male baboon wanting
to pass on as many copies of your genes,
you may decide the really manipulative thing
to do is to be nice to some female
and groom her more than she grooms
you, which is a very rare thing for a male baboon to do.
So great alternative strategies, very heartwarming.
Not so heartwarming, because there
are other alternative strategies available in some species,
alternatives where male sexual behavior is not
the outcome of explicit male-male competition,
but instead takes an alternative strategy.
And you see one example of this in orangutans.
Orangutans, great apes, and they've
got a very interesting bizarre social system, but what
you have is your basic, nonetheless, sort of familiar
picture of male-male competition with a large percentage
of orangutan male aggressions built
around the reproductive access to females,
and you've got a whole world of very peripheralized
low ranking males who never mate.
And there's an interesting physiology
that goes along with it.
That was the picture that everybody used to have,
and then in the 1970s, pioneer researcher in this, Birute
Galdikas, who has studied orangs for decades
out there in Indonesia, she noted something
really disturbing, which is low ranking,
non-reproductive male orangs have an alternative mating
strategy.
What do they do?
They rape females, and this was the first introduction
of that term into zoology, and that is not
an anthropomorphism.
If defined as a violent process of mating
with a female against her will, this
is what goes on in orangutans.
A certain percentage of reproduction
is low ranking guys who have no direct access
to females as a result of male-male interactions.
This is not the nice guy alternative,
so there is precedent for this also.
And this is by now very well-documented behavior
among orangutans.
Then if you want to call it with something
very subtle and clever, there's apparently
this whole world of fish species,
where low ranking males can pretend to be a female
and take on female coloration and pretend to be just
friends and someone they can pour their heart out to,
and then suddenly one day they have a penis,
and where'd that come from?
And everything suddenly changes there.
OK.
So we have the very strict boring models.
Females invest more calories than males,
and, thus, they are much more picky.
Males mate with females entirely as a function
of male-male competition, and thus, evolution
is driven by male aggression and all of that.
Let me just see as people are clearly
about to run out the door.
 See some exam-related announcements.
First off, there are the statistics, mean and median,
which, in terms of numbers and what
they mean-- what they mean in my book
is that people are doing a good job in here.
So, good going.
Also having done an amazing job are the TAs, who, other
than coming to class here, have not
been allowed out of the conference room
since you left your exams with them.
They have screamed with the repetitiveness of grading
the same question 550 times.
And they worked really hard to get this back to you
guys in time for decisions about pass,
no credit-- that sort of thing.
So these guys did yet another amazing job.
[APPLAUSE AND CHEERS]
Yay, TAs.
Let's see.
The other thing is, the exams will be outside,
at the end of class.
A to M is upstairs, and the rest of those letters
are downstairs.
So start figuring out which you are.
The TAs will be flinging boxes of exams around out there, so
go get yours afterward.
Again, people did a good job.
OK, picking up on our by now sickeningly familiar time
core strategy thing, here, we left off on Friday,
way to the left, in our very last area of sexual behavior
and the logic there is-- ooh, somewhere along the way
we mentioned genes, or we mentioned
a hormone, or a receptor, or whatever, and thus
were immediately talking about the evolution thereof,
all the way back.
What does natural selection theory
tell us about the evolution of sexual behavior?
And what we've been doing is bouncing
between the two genders, in terms of strategies,
starting off with the basic asymmetry
of caloric expenditure on sperm versus an egg plus a pregnancy,
plus, in most species, raising the offspring.
All of that giving rise to the famed promiscuity
on the part of males-- the lower levels of pickiness.
What we saw was the role of male-male competition
and making sense of behaviors that
are involved in passing on more copies of genes.
We have also seen all sorts of male strategies
for decreasing the reproductive success of competitors
and, in the same process, decreasing
that of females for the future.
And female counterstrategies in a lot of those cases.
What we also then transitioned to
was what female choice was about, even in species
that were tournament species.
And what we transition to now is looking
at aspects of female-female competition,
in terms of sexual reproduction.
What you see is-- predominantly in species
that are pair-bonding, that are monogamous--
what you see is the potential for a great deal
of female-female competition for access to males.
That ironic turn of events where,
if the whole system works-- where
you give birth and the guy who believes
he's the father is going to be taken care of the kids,
and what you want is someone who is good at that,
is confident at that, can act maternal in a convincing way,
and thus is subject to a whole lot of competition
on the part of females.
And thus what you get is selection pressures
in those species-- New World monkeys, for example-- a lot
of bird species-- selection pressures.
Where, if anything, it's the females
who wind up being more aggressive than the males.
The females who tend to have the larger body
size, who have the more pronounced
secondary sexual characteristics.
What's that about?
It's females competing with females for males to pick them,
exactly the opposite scenario as in most of the species
we've been hearing about.
OK.
What this then brings us to is the next great question,
which already I've had a lot of people
ask me during breaks-- all the way back way there,
in terms of making sense of the evolution
of this type of sexual behavior and that type
and the other type, in terms of passing on copies of your genes
and you and your relatives-- all of that.
Which brings you, inevitably, to the question of, well, what
about the evolution of homosexuality?
Because this has always been the puzzle
in the book of zoologist, evolutionary biologist,
et cetera, trying to make sense of all
of this in the context of adaptation
and passing on copies of genes, especially when you
see how widespread this is in lots and lots
and lots of other species.
What's up with that?
Because, up until relatively recent times,
across virtually every culture out there,
gay men had a much fewer number of copies of genes,
on the average, that they were passing on.
How could this trait to be so universal?
And best estimates are 5% to 20% rate in every human culture
ever looked at.
So what's the selection for that?
Or why hasn't that been selected against?
Basically, there's been three theories
that have floated around.
And all of them are predicated on one very simple fact that
still is not all that factual, which
is that there is a genetic component to one's
sexual orientation.
And we already heard all sorts of bits of evidence
about prenatal endocrine environment that
argues in other directions.
We have already heard that there have been those studies which
find covariance of sexual orientation
in identical twins versus nonidentical--
finding a genetic marker, but one that nobody else
is able to replicate.
So everything now is predicated on the notion
that, well, genes have at least a little bit of something
to do with it.
So, three theories that have floated around,
first one being the heterozygotic-vigor argument.
Lots of folks will recognize that
from other realms of genetics.
That's the deal where you can have certain traits which
can be in the homozygotic form or in the heterozygotic form.
And people who are new to this, go back
and check your notes from the Mendel genetics catch-up
sections.
And what you see is, with lots of diseases
you get an extreme version is indeed a disease
and a partial version is, in fact, adaptive.
And the classic example that always gets trotted out
is sickle-cell anemia-- full-blown homozygotic version,
horrible hematological disorder; partial, heterozygotic version,
resistance to malaria and a gazillion diseases out there.
And what's done is metaphorically
running the same argument of saying, whatever gene genes are
relevant, maybe the homozygotic form
is the one that produces a behavioral phenotype which
decreases reproductive success.
But there's some heterozygotic form
which has some huge advantage and enough of one to outweigh
the one-fourth of the relatives who wind up
with the homozygotic version.
So that's one model, for which there is very little evidence.
Next one.
Next one is a gender-dependent genetic argument, as follows.
It is a trait.
It is a genetically influenced trait
which, when expressed in one gender,
is maladaptive and decreases reproductive success.
But when it is expressed in the other gender,
it is highly adaptive and increases reproductive success.
And you can immediately run your numbers argument there
that, as long as the benefits for the other kind of sibling
or gender is larger than the detriment here,
this is going to be selected for.
What would that look like?
Where is the evidence for that?
What one would predict is that you would see, for gay men,
that their sisters have a higher-than-average
reproductive rate.
And that is absolutely there in the literature.
So the people who push for this view would say,
aha, there is some sort of trait which, in a male,
increases the likelihood, manifesting as homosexuality
in a female, as some route by which there is
increased reproductive success.
The third model is the "helper at the nest" model,
which is that the individual who traditionally is not
passing on copies of their own genes
directly-- instead, what they're doing
is expending resources on helping their siblings.
OK, so that kind of sounds like the second model, also.
What's the difference?
The second model says that sisters of gay men
should have increased reproductive rates.
What the third model-- the "helping at the nest"
model-- suggests is, both sisters and brothers
should have increased reproductive rates.
And that's actually what's mostly been seen.
So, support for this "helper at the nest" kin-selection
kind of argument.
OK.
What else does one look for in a mate, besides all
of the stuff that males are competing about
and females in pair-bonding species?
What are some of the characteristics that
pop up over and over again, when it's getting around
to who looks good to you, if you are a damselfly trying
to pick out a mate, and in all these other species?
One initial characteristic, which
is the famed role of facial symmetry in attractiveness.
This has an interesting history, and this goes back
to the 19th century.
And there was some guy-- who was it?
It was Francis Galton.
Was it?
Maybe.
And it was Francis Galton, I think,
who was having-- no, it couldn't be.
They didn't have-- forget that.
Don't write that down.
There was some guy in the 19th century who
was a famous criminologist and was pushing a classic nonsense
theory of the time, which is that there is a criminal face
and that people who are really skilled police people could
to look at somebody's face beforehand and immediately
predict that this is someone who is going
to commit a criminal act, inevitably,
at some-- all sorts of nonsense.
Genetic determinism and racism and [INAUDIBLE]
biases of all sorts running through there.
Complete nonsense-- yet one of the dominant intellectual
models in criminology in the 19th century
was that there are facial characteristics that
are typical of criminals.
So this was this individual who decided to come up
with the archetypal face of what a criminal looks like
and managed to get photographs of the faces of a whole bunch
of different criminals, pulling them out of the jail
or whatever and taking a picture with the newly invented camera.
And, through some technique that clearly was some proto Adobe
Photoshop sort of ancestor thing,
was able to overlap the faces in order to come up
with a composite face.
And this composite face was now going to tell you,
this is the most criminal-looking face
that anybody has ever seen.
And that's not what happened.
Instead, everybody looked at that face
and said, hey, that guy's kind of good-looking!
That guy is, in fact, really good-looking.
And had just stumbled on this interesting thing that,
when you average faces, when you toss them all together,
that when you merge them, they look
more attractive than the individuals
that they came from-- when you make composite pictures.
And this has kept all sorts of people happy doing experiments
where they do mixes and matches of starting with 100
different pictures of people and combine subsets of them
and having people rating attractiveness and stuff.
And it's this absolutely bizarre thing--
that the more faces that go into a composite, the more,
on the average, people perceive them as being attractive,
amid incredibly subtle differences
between a composite picture of 50 faces versus 25,
all of that, people are able to pick up the differences-- not
necessarily consciously.
So what is that about?
And what became clear, many decades later,
is that what happens when you make
a lot of faces all into one composite
is you get a highly symmetrical face.
And this seems to be the key thing that comes through
in that realm of attractiveness.
Which is that, when you average in a whole lot of faces,
one of the things you average is the averageness of the face.
And you get rid of asymmetries.
And everyone knows that-- who would you want to mate with?
[LAUGHTER]
OK, so, thereby proving the point.
And what you've got is, symmetry is apparently
a good, reliable marker of health.
Wildly asymmetric faces are typically
the result of complications-- developmental ones-- health
sort of issues.
So the general interpretation is that symmetry is attractive
because it is a marker of health.
And every single article you will ever
read in sort of the lay press-- or even
in some of the science journals, which
should be above this sort of thing--
will have the picture of some famously attractive somebody
or other, with the face up there,
and all the little caliper markings, and showing
the same sizes, and then some poor schnook who's
chosen to be the asymmetric face who's stuck up there.
Did the Newsweek article wind up being in the readings?
No, it wasn't-- yes.
OK.
Lyle Lovett-- is that the face they had there
that they were making vicious fun of and pointing out
lip asymmetries and such?
Something about the symmetry seems to be a marker for health
and is considered more attractive.
And people can pick up astonishingly subtle
asymmetries in faces.
Babies, at two months of age, show--
when you are doing morphed faces,
composite faces, where you can very minorly adjust
the degree of symmetry or asymmetry in the face-- babies,
at two months of age, are already
preferring to look at pictures of more symmetrical faces.
You find this in lots of other species, as well.
When you look at animals lever-pressing--
rats, for example, getting access
to other rats of the opposite gender.
And you will see there's a bias for symmetry there.
There is a bias in nonhuman primates
for more symmetrical faces.
How's this for a nutty study that
was published about five years ago, in Nature?
And this one reported that people who had symmetrical
faces were better dancers.
OK, let's work through that one.
What was that one about?
And they did-- it was a bizarre study,
but somehow, nonetheless, it was irresistible.
Here's what they showed.
They filmed all sorts of people dancing.
And, no doubt, they did perfect controls
and they, like, made sure everybody
danced to the same thing, which was,
like-- oh, I don't know-- something--
a scientist rapping to something or other.
And people dancing away, there.
And then they used this amazing technique,
which I didn't understand in the slightest,
with some sort of camera-capture technique
that would make everybody dancing look like Gumby.
So you took out all the individual features-- anything
at all.
And people would then rate them on the dancing.
And it would turn out that people
who were rated by both genders, of either gender,
as being a better dancer, when you then
went and checked out their faces afterward,
with your slide rule, turned out to have more symmetrical faces.
Whoa!
Isn't that bizarre?
My guess would be that this is one of those indirect routes
that we've already seen some examples of.
My guess would be, more symmetrical faces
are thus more attractive, and thus such people
are treated better and are more confident in life
and more extroverted and more comfortable dancing
when they knew that they were going
to wind up looking like Gumby.
So that is probably what the indirect route is.
But running through all of this is this symmetry business.
And it's there in species after species.
And humans are amazing at picking up subtleties at it.
One additional finding in the symmetry world-- women
at the time that they are ovulating
have their faces become ever so slightly more symmetrical.
[COMMENTS AMONG STUDENTS]
OK, well, that's going to get people
all nutsy in the coming weeks, no doubt,
trying to figure out what that's about.
I did not see a good explanation as to what that was about,
but that has been observed in the literature.
So the first thing, in terms of what
one looks for in a mate, if you're
some basic social animal-- first set of features, this business
about symmetry.
Next realm-- this whole world of secondary sexual
characteristics.
Why is it that female peacocks like male peacocks
to look like male peacocks, and all that sort of thing?
What is that about?
And people have been working with this one for years.
And there is a zoologist named Zahavi
who has been very influential-- Israeli zoologist--
who came up with what is called the "handicap principle."
As follows.
Why is it that secondary sexual characteristics are appealing?
Characteristics that exaggerate the difference in appearance
by gender.
Why is that appealing?
Because, in effect, the bigger and more garish and the more
over-the-top your secondary sexual characteristic is,
the more you were communicating to the world,
I have so much energy on board, and I am so healthy,
that I can afford to squander massive numbers of calories
on these asinine neon antlers I'm walking around with.
That it's an argument there that this
is a display of, in a sense, conspicuous consumption--
the ability to put energy into these large secondary sexual
characteristics.
That these are markers of health and of good immune systems.
Lots of evidence for this.
And this is, by now, a whole field that people have studied.
One version of it.
These were studies done with marsupial mice.
And there was something having to do
with their marsupialesque reproduction that
made this the species to do this with.
But it was doing sperm insemination of females.
And what was done was that they took the sperm
from these male marsupial mice, after measuring
some secondary sexual characteristics in them.
I believe that they don't have antlers,
but I don't remember what the actual thing was.
And what they were able to do was
to now have sperm from males of differing
degrees of exaggerated secondary characteristics.
And what they showed was that the males who
had the more dramatic secondary characteristics-- their sperm
were more fertile.
So that was a first big vote in this handicap principle
that things like secondary appearances,
secondary sexual ones, can be a marker for health
and/or fertility.
Now why should that be?
What you essentially are seeing there is, it is a display.
It is a potlatch.
It is a display of how much energy
you can afford to waste and thus how much you
must have on board.
It is a marker of health and good immunity.
This has been shown in lots of studies.
Along the lines of, the same sort
of signals that give rise to the secondary sexual characteristic
are markers of immune function.
A well-functioning immune system will
be generating some molecule which
exaggerates facial coloration.
And that's the secondary sexual characteristic--
that there is an explicit link between immune function,
immune competence, and these markers.
Interesting.
A study that just came out recently,
looking at women from, I believe it was,
about 20 different industrialized countries.
And what was shown was that, in general, women
have a preference for faces of men
that have strong pronounced secondary characteristics--
which is, big, jutting jaw, high forehead,
lots of muscle stuff going on.
And what they showed was that the longer the life expectancy
in the particular country, the better the economy,
the better the quality of life, the less women in that country
had a bias towards male-looking males.
Which is extremely interesting.
What's the comparison there?
It was all those, like, Scandinavian countries.
Thank god for the Scandinavian countries,
because they always provide the extreme of these distributions.
So, in those Scandinavian countries,
like, there has not been a guy who's been,
like, selected for a date because of the height
of his forehead, in centuries.
Whereas what they showed was, in a lot of other cultures--
which were the ones who were most extreme on the list,
I am not remembering, which is not very helpful.
But a very different sort of end of things.
And there, much stronger selection for what
are viewed as traits, as markers of fecundity and health.
More evidence about this.
What you see is, all of this is a signal-- all of this
is a signal, not only in terms of who you want to mate with,
in terms of who you are passing on your copies of genes
in cooperation with, but also the possibility
that the other individual is infectious with something
or other.
And throughout the world of social beasts,
nobody likes getting sexually transmitted diseases.
And a lot of what this whole handicap principle is about,
a lot of this advertising about what a great immune system you
have, is a way of advertising, I do not
have a communicable disease.
All sorts of species-- individuals
are extremely good at detecting the smells
in the others of parasitic infections,
of all sorts of other infections,
and avoiding them like the plague.
A common theme in lots and lots of species.
Rodents, where it's been most studied-- a remarkable ability
to smell out the health of another individual.
And this is someone you want to stay away from-- that they're
going to give you an STD.
So that's part of it, as well.
So, of course, what you start getting
are individuals trying to cheat at all of this.
And this is suddenly the world of selection
to uncouple your secondary sexual characteristics
from your health.
Is there a way to cheat?
Is there a way?
And what is seen in some bird species is,
you've got some guy on his deathbed, there.
And what's he doing with his last 3 and 1/2 calories
worth of energy?
He's expending it on wing coloration
or whatever the secondary characteristic thing is, there,
that he's got four minutes of life left,
and maybe there's one more chance
to pass on copies of his genes.
You get cheating, as well.
You get cases of disproportionate shunting
of caloric investment towards some of these markers
amid animals being sick.
So, of course, you have to have counterstrategies.
And we have yet another world of coevolution
between some sort of exploitative strategy
and a counter one to try to detect that.
Then you've got one problem with this whole literature, which
is, there is a certain way to frame things so that you never,
ever can get a finding that disagrees
with your general stance.
OK, here's how it goes.
Here's the version that we've just
heard of this handicap principle, which
is, what you have to have is your secondary sexual
characteristic-- the intensity of it has to be reflective
of the quality of your immune system.
And in lots of species, facial coloration
is generated molecules from the immune system
in a linear relationship, there.
Yes, that is a way of advertising,
I've got a great immune system.
But get this.
Meanwhile, you can have exactly the opposite case,
which is, you can have your secondary sexual characteristic
driven by an infection that you have.
And what you are presumably communicating is, if I'm still
able to do this ridiculous courtship dance,
despite the fact that I'm teeming with parasites,
I've got the greatest DNA going around, there.
Hey, how about it?
Where you see this is in vultures.
And the mere notion that vultures having sex,
and let alone them having sex based on thinking some of them
are more attractive than others, leaves
me breathless with admiration.
But what you see is, in vultures--
I'm forgetting which species-- sexually dimorphic--
the males have more colorful faces.
They tend to have these orange faces made out of carotenoids--
these pigment things.
These carotenoids.
So one version that we've heard already
is, OK, where are the carotenoids coming from?
They're produced in the immune system.
And the happier your immune system, the more carotenoids
you pump out.
That would be the first scenario we've heard.
In vultures, you see exactly the opposite.
Which is, where-- this is going to go downhill really fast,
now.
So where do you get carotenoids, if you
are a vulture in the plains of East Africa?
You get them by eating ungulate feces.
Which vultures are perfectly happy to do, if it's fresh--
or even if it's not so fresh.
And what that will typically contain are lots of parasites.
Consuming a whole lot of ungulate feces,
rather than, say, ungulate muscle,
increases the likelihood that you have some sort of infection
that you've picked up.
What's the interpretation there?
Yet here I am, bouncing around happily and energetically.
Just imagine how great my genes are,
if I'm able to do that amid just teeming with parasites, because
of my unlikely sort of dietary habits.
So you've got it, here, that it can go both ways.
Ooh, dramatic secondary sexual characteristic
is a marker of a good immune system--
I can fight off disease.
Dramatic secondary sexual characteristic as a marker of,
look how well I'm functioning, here,
despite teeming with some disease.
You get it both ways.
It remains very, very controversial--
for the three and a half people who deeply care about this.
One additional version of that-- and the "there's no free lunch,
and there is no free ungulate"-- whatever-- OK,
one additional version of that are studies now showing that
in lions what you get is-- highly tournament species,
and thus a highly dramatic set of secondary sexual
characteristics.
The manes.
The manes on the lion.
And what everybody knows from The Lion King
is that they can be very big and dramatic-looking
and thus make you very attractive.
Unless you're hanging out with hyenas.
But what is clear, also, is, it comes with a price.
What is the most attractive sort of male lion you can see?
It's a black-maned male.
Because that is one that is most expensive,
in this handicap-principle sense.
But there's a downside, if you've
got a black mane, which is, your head heats up more, sitting
there in the African sun.
You've got to spend more energy on thermal regulation.
There's a downside to it.
All of these things, where you're balancing.
What else?
What else, in terms of attractiveness?
So we've now got, lots of species,
the symmetry business as a marker for health.
The secondary sexual characteristic nonsense
stuff as a marker of health but interpretable
in a number of different ways.
Then there are the secondary sexual characteristics
that are more directly markers of fertility.
And what we've entered into, here,
is the world of primate species, where females
have external swellings when ovulating,
when there are visible signs of estrus, of going into heat.
Humans are concealed ovulators.
And we already know some of the theories about that.
But all the other primates get explicit, observable estrus
swellings when it is time that they're ovulating.
And all you need to do is look at baboons.
And beginning somewhere around junior high,
when they start hitting puberty, some females
have bigger swellings than other females.
And it turns out, these stupid, shallow male baboons
prefer the ones with the big swellings to the ones
with the small swellings.
You can even show, with captive male baboons,
that they will lever-press more to get
to see pictures of female baboons
with big swellings instead of middle-sized ones
or little ones.
There you go.
Somewhere out there, there is a magnificent reality
show to be set up along those lines.
What you see with that is, what's the swellings about?
It is a marker of estrogen levels.
It is a marker of-- the higher the estrogen levels,
the more the swelling.
And what you wind up seeing, in various studies
by now, replicated, showing that,
among female nonhuman primates, those females
with larger swellings have a better infant survival
during the first year of life of the kids.
It's a marker of greater fertility and greater health.
And there's maybe some element of a handicap principle
there, because by the time you get female monkeys
with the biggest swellings around, they now
weigh about 25% more than they weigh the rest of the time,
all because of the water retention.
And presumably part of the signal
there is, if I can be running around
in my female-in-estrus sort of way,
despite 25% more weight sloshing around at the end of me, just
imagine how strong and healthy I am.
So that, as a source of attraction.
Meanwhile, over at the male end of things,
in terms of looking for other markers of attraction
in females-- by the time you get to humans,
we are not, again, external ovulators.
But what you have with humans is the famed waist-hip ratio
measure.
And this one has been endlessly studied and argued about.
The notion that the larger the size of the hips,
relative to the size of the waist, the greater
the waist-hip ratio-- no, the lesser
the-- flip that around the other way.
OK.
The bigger the hips are, relative to the waist--
this is a marker of fertility.
That is a marker of childbearing pelvises.
That is a marker of all sorts of developmental health
that augurs well for having a baby pass through the birth
canal.
In culture after culture, men find
women to be more attractive who have a higher-skewed ratio
of hip to waist.
So that's been studied all over the place.
What you have, though, as the central controversy
in that field is, if every single culture that that's
been studied in has been contaminated by their exposure
to westernized culture and its pervasive values,
which may be the source of that.
So, among the hip-waist sort of zealots,
what has been the Golden Fleece to go after,
what has been the equivalent of getting
identical twins separated at birth, what is the thing they
go after, is to find a population of humans
who are having their first contact with the outside world
and have had no exposure to the westernized world.
And thus you are able to rush in there,
quickly master their language, and, once you've
done that, you get to ask them the first question
in their entire content with the westernized world, which
is, so, which of these look better to you?
Asking the guys, there.
And, at this point-- not surprisingly,
there is not a huge literature of asking people,
on the first encounters, about hip-waist ratios-- what you see
is, the literature is mixed.
When you look at more traditional societies,
you do not necessarily see as strong
of a hip-waist-ratio set of opinions.
But nonetheless, at least some of that
is universal in every culture that's been looked at.
Again, as a marker of fertility.
Meanwhile, over at the female end of things,
you've already heard what some of the things
are that are looked for, in terms of responsiveness
to secondary characteristics in males,
which is jutting jaws, big, high foreheads, and muscle mass.
And all of these are assays indirectly
of testosterone levels or testosterone
exposure or sensitivity during adolescence.
Those are preferred.
Interesting thing.
Studies showing that, when you give women
a choice of faces of males that have been manipulated,
changing the dramatic-- how dramatic
the secondary characteristics are-- like forehead
and jutting-jawedness and angularity of face and stuff--
what you see is an interesting dichotomy.
Which is, in these studies, women on the average rate
the rounder-faced pictures of men, such men,
looking more likable, more honest, more trustworthy,
and less desirable.
OK.
So this is hopeless.
And what do you know?
Those-- well, I won't go there, either.
What those show is separable traits, there.
Separable traits, in terms of what's
attractive-- what information.
And, again, when you look at these studies,
the differences are, like, 5% difference in nostril width
and things, when they're manip-- these are extraordinarily
subtle differences, where people are not consciously aware
of them.
Which face looks more attractive?
Which face would you like more?
Which face would you trust more if they told you
to vote for somebody or other?
An interesting separation, there.
OK.
One additional one is that, in women,
when women are ovulating, they prefer
more sexually secondary, secondary-sexually
characteristically dramatic male faces.
At the time of ovulation, women rate as more attractive male
faces with the juttier jaws and the greater muscle mass
and the forehead stuff going on.
What we see here is this theme of, at the time that estrogen
levels are at their highest in humans and lots of realms,
in addition to other species, detection
of pheromones from males is the most sensitive.
Ability to pick up subtle differences
in facial symmetry or secondary sexual characteristics
are at their best.
And the preferences are derived from that.
This is, in some cases, some rather substantial effects.
OK.
So, what other things?
There's one problem that runs through this entire literature.
OK.
So here's the deal.
You are a-- uh-- you're a gazelle.
You're a female gazelle, and you have read lots of zoology
and you know all about this handicap principle.
And you know the fact that big, dramatic secondary sexual
characteristics on guys is a marker
of better immune systems and more fertile sperm
and all sorts of great stuff.
So you go out of your way to go and find one of those guys.
You mate with him.
And you've just given birth.
So, knowing what you know, what you, of course, now realize
is, you've got a great kid on your hands
that have all these terrific genes
from that jutting-jawed antelope guy you mated with.
And you better make sure this kid survives,
because they have an enormous potential
for having a big reproductive success later on.
What do you do?
You expend more calories in taking care of them.
This has been shown in all sorts of species.
Mate various birds in various bird species-- mate females
with males who are more attractive versus mating them
with less attractive, and what you see
is that the females who have mated
with the more attractive males give birth to bigger eggs.
That's interesting.
OK, so you're seeing the evidence of the good genes
coming from the guy.
Male genes have nothing to do with egg size.
It is how much protein the mother
puts into the egg production and the egg development.
And what you see is, she makes this a self-fulfilling
prophecy.
In a lot of species, now, it has been
shown that when females mate with more attractive males
they put more effort into having the offspring survive.
The offspring survive better.
And yes, what do you know?
You really do want to mate with guys with big antlers
and that sort of thing.
This big problem with self-fulfilling stuff.
So that's a confound that has run through the field.
Another confound-- and here is one
that shows how many species are far less distant from us
than one might think.
This was work by a guy named Lee Dugatkin
at the University of Kentucky.
And what he does is study ospreys or some kind
of bird thing that runs around.
And what he does is, he first gets a male and female osprey,
and he introduces them to each other.
And what he looks for are circumstances
where the magic does not occur.
There is no chemistry between them.
The female rejects the guy.
And, at that point, what he does is, in the next round,
he makes the male appear to be very popular.
He puts the male here, and he takes a whole bunch
of stuffed female birds and puts them around
in a circle around him, gawking at him with rapt admiration
and just frozen in their place at the wonders of, like,
the coloration on his bill from eating who-knows-whose feces.
And what you see then is, the female
who spurned him is now more likely to do
solicitive courting gestures with him.
In other words, she's jumping on a bandwagon.
And this has now been shown in a number of species.
What's the logic of this?
This is exactly what secondary sexual characteristics
are about.
I don't understand why anyone considers
that to be attractive.
This individual does nothing for me.
But if it appears to be the case that those traits are very
popular, and thus those traits are predictors
of being able to pass on many copies of your genes,
I sure want my kids to have those traits.
And thus this bandwagon effect.
So all of these are versions of just shallow,
shallow, horrible-values versions
of who one looks for in a mate.
But then, of course, we go to all the pair-bonding species.
And as we heard from many lectures ago,
the rituals in lots of those species of male courtship
built around showing that they are a competent parent.
Showing that they can do some rough approximation of acting
like a mother to these babies.
What's that about?
And that's the whole world of male birds doing courtship
by bringing worms and feeding the mother and showing, look,
I know what kind of things we eat.
I know how to bring a worm.
By the time you get to pair-bonding species,
the rituals and what is attractive are often markers
not of fertility but of parenting skill-- parenting
competence.
Flipped the other way, in most nonhuman primate species
that have been looked at, when are females
most attractive to males, independent of the size
of their estrus swelling?
When they've already had a couple of kids.
Females, the first-time-out rounds of ovulating,
are less preferred than females who have
had a number of kids already.
If it is the same thing going on, what she has already proven
is she's competent enough that she didn't
kill the kids by dropping them out
of the tree at various points.
This being as a marker, again, of competence.
OK.
Final realm of what one looks for in a mate,
across lots and lots of different species.
Which is not only someone who appears
healthy and symmetrical, and these exciting secondary
characteristics that are markers of lots of fertility,
and also whatever everybody else thinks is attractive,
you suddenly do as well-- the last thing that
tends to be a theme through lots and lots of species,
and in every human culture, is being
attracted to someone who's kind of just like you are.
Being attracted to someone who is similar.
And the term for this is "homogamy."
Homogamy, polygamy, monogamy.
In this case, homogamy-- mating with someone
who is homogeneous, who is similar in traits of yours.
And across cultures, including in the United States,
people are extremely homogamous in who they wind up marrying.
Here are the statistics.
When you look at couples in this country,
there is better than a 90%-chance likelihood of them
sharing the same religion, of being within three years of age
of each other, of sharing the same race-- the ethnicity--
sharing the socioeconomic status of their childhood--
did they both grow up poor, wealthy, whatever--
and sharing political views.
More than 90% concordance in this country
on those traits-- markers of homogamous preference
for someone who is just like you.
Stepping down a bit-- not in this range-- but more than 40%
homogamy for a couple having IQs that are within,
I don't know, five points of each other-- having
similar levels of education.
Those are very homogamous traits.
Then a whole bunch of weirdo minor ones
which, nonetheless, are still statistically significant.
A 20% to 40% likelihood of couples
being the same height-- not the same height,
but say, for example, in the top 10
percentile of height for their sex-- scaled
to what's within gender.
Weight, hair color.
And then you get into this bizarre world of lung capacity,
of width of nostrils, of width of eyes.
People have studied these, and these are traits
that show significant homogamy.
In this fairly low range, but nonetheless significant
at a higher-than-expected rate.
What are these weird things being about?
These are probably surrogate markers
for preferring people of similar race, similar ethnicity.
That's probably where those numbers are coming from.
So what's this about?
This is suddenly barreling us back into the world
from many lectures ago of, you don't
want to mate with someone who shares
half their genes with you-- the dangers of inbreeding.
But you also don't necessarily want
to mate with someone who is so unrelated that there
is no drive of kin selection for cooperation.
We have now heard, from bird species to humans,
you get the optimal fertility somewhere
around third to fourth cousins.
You get the optimal fertility, under circumstances
that select for a fair degree of homogamy
across different cultures.
And historically, this is no surprise at all--
that there is a great deal of homogamy.
Various studies have shown that your average traditional
hunter-gatherer winds up being married
to somebody who grew up less than 40 kilometers away
from them.
Studies show that people in traditional agricultural
villages in the developing world wind up
being married to someone, on the average, less than 10
kilometers away from them.
You are getting an awful lot of people winding up
being married with individuals who look a lot like them.
And back to that issue of partial relatedness--
third to fourth cousins.
Yes.
But couldn't it just be that I know a lot more people who
are the same age as me, the same race,
the same socioeconomic status, and so on?
OK, well, though, look around the room.
This is a very heterogeneous corner
of the planet we've come up with, here.
Yes, it's very different when you
look in more homogeneous societies, there.
But when you begin to look at the increasingly diverse
Western European ones, you see a fair amount
of homogamy going on.
Very interesting data.
Iceland-- yet another of our good-old Scandinavian--
is Iceland technically Scandinavian?
Or are they just, like, good guys
who should be Scandinavians?
They're so dull and healthy and sensible.
OK.
So in those sensible, non-Scandinavian Icelandics,
who have, like-- I don't know, what?
--300,000 people in the whole country, and all of them
are no more than sixth cousins apart, and all of them
have just fanatically clean records, going back centuries,
as to who was married to who, studies
have now been done, looking over the course of 200 years,
in Iceland of how closely related different couples were.
And what you see is, optimal fertility, optimal number
of children who survived into adulthood,
you get from third- to fourth-cousin marriages.
Recent studies showing that.
One additional, interesting version
of this homogamy stuff, which is, in the United States
you see something slightly different.
You see an age factor coming in here,
which is, people are more likely to make less homogamous choices
as to their mates, the younger they are when they get married.
What's that a surrogate for?
The incredibly depressing fact that, on the average,
people get more and more closed-minded
as they get older.
You see the greatest heterogamy in marriages--
the greatest likelihood of people marrying someone
with a very different background, the younger they
are.
In the early 20s is when you find the peak
for a lot of these traits-- when you find the least homogamy.
One interesting exception to that, or a partial exception,
which is with religion.
And what you see is, you look at people getting
married in their early 20s.
This is the likelihood of marrying somebody
from a different religion.
And then it goes way down in the 30s and 40s.
And somewhere between 50 and 60, there's
another little blip that goes up.
And this has been documented in a number of studies.
What's that blip about?
Any theories?
Oh-- OK, somebody [INAUDIBLE] there.
Um-- fewer options for mates?
Fewer options for mates.
That's one depressing possibility.
And just wait until you're in the nursing home and, like,
anything that moves you imprint on.
Yes, theory?
They're not going to have kids anymore,
so they don't need to worry about passing down
[INAUDIBLE] to their kids.
OK.
So the issue of-- if you do that, if you have waited
long enough that you're not going to have kids, that you're
not going to have all these fights of,
are you going to be a, you know, a Mac family or a PC family
or all those sorts of things that can tear people apart
[INAUDIBLE].
OK, so that's a possibility.
How about another one?
Yeah.
You're reflecting your mortality.
OK, you're reflecting on mortality,
and you're deciding, enough of that nonsense.
Who cares?
This is someone who matters.
Yes, that's a possibility.
What else?
Was that an idea?
Midlife crisis?
Midlife crisis.
So it's either you get a convertible
or you marry someone from, you know,
Tierra Del Fuego or something.
So all of those seem to go into it.
One additional one, which I find to be absolutely,
like, wonderful, in terms of just how bizarre it is.
Which is, when they interview people,
what you also see is, the ones who tend to have this peak,
they have been in long-term relationships
with the individual.
What was that about?
They're waiting for their parents to die,
so they don't kill them by marrying this person.
[LAUGHTER]
That appears to be part of that scenario.
Which is, once they're dead, then we can go get married.
Because I couldn't possibly do this to them before then.
And that appears to be part of this peak, also.
OK.
Finally-- finally, a study-- famous study
that was done about 15 years ago,
by an evolutionary biologist named David Buss, who's
now at the University of Texas.
He wasn't, at the time.
And he did one of these sorts of studies
that we recognize by now, which is sort of questioning people,
questionnaires of people from a lot of different cultures,
all over the planet.
And this was this massive study of I don't remember how many
different cultures.
But it ranged from non-westernized, nomadic
pastoralists, non-westernized agriculturalists,
socialist countries, communist ones, capitalist ones--
everything in between-- individualistic societies,
communalist societies-- all of that.
It was tens of thousands of people in the study.
Where he gave all these people a list of traits.
And he would say, which of these traits
are most important to you, in terms of who you marry?
And what came out in every single culture
looked at-- as follows.
In every culture looked at, women
are more likely than men to want a mate who is older than them.
In every culture looked at, men, more common than women,
looking for someone who's younger than them.
In every culture looked at, women more than men
citing the economic prowess of this individual
as being part of what constitutes
the desirable traits.
In every one of them that's been looked at,
men having a greater preference than women for markers-- health
markers-- of fertility in the person they would wind up with.
This was so depressing, because this
is every culture on this planet coming up with this cliche.
Everybody learned about the study,
and how remarkably disturbing it was
in terms of all of those stereotypes across so
many different cultures.
Women are looking for older guys who have lots of money,
and men are looking for younger women with big hips
or who knows what.
And this came through in every single culture.
But what everybody always misses when
they discuss this study was one additional one.
And this is, like, enough for, like,
Hallmark cards-- all of that.
What everybody knows is, across these cultures,
these traits were more likely to be rated
highly by one sex versus the other,
but in every single one of the countries, what you find
is both sexes had an equal preference for the number
one thing on the list, which is winding up with somebody
who's nice to them.
OK.
On that note, let's take a break.
We now switch to our next second half
of the course topic, which is going to follow
the exact same strategy.
And where we're shifting to, here,
is going to be a whole bunch of lectures on the large,
sprawling, interconnected subjects
of aggression, violence, competition, cooperation,
empathy.
And what we will be doing there is wrestling
with all sorts of features of the complexities of these
and where the underlying biology is--
enormously important social implications,
in a lot of these cases.
And, of course, what we need to start off with
is, what's the behavior about?
How objectively do you describe these things?
And it struck me-- a good way of starting that, not only giving
a sense of the range of what aggression can be like,
but also a very important point that's going to come through
in this entire lecture-- it struck me that a good thing
to be would be to describe a relatively recent exposure I
had to human aggression.
Which was me being aggressive to somebody else.
This was, now, a couple of years ago,
before my back disintegrated on me.
I used to play soccer two, three times a week.
And I had been doing this for decades.
And I'm actually totally lousy at soccer.
And, like, I'm short and I'm old and I'm not
particularly coordinated.
And [INAUDIBLE].
So this has never been something that
was, like, one of the things I was going to go to the Olympics
with.
So, a number of years ago, there was consistently
this one guy who seemed to always wind up
on the other side, and who somehow always wound up
guarding me, who was a total son of a bitch.
This guy, he was-- he was a lot younger than me,
and he was a lot more athletic, and he was a lot taller
than me, and he was a lot more skillful in this game.
And, on top of everything else, he was a really dirty player.
And this was driving me crazy.
Every time the ball would get near me,
he would elbow me in my ear, and he would do something like--
[LAUGHTER]
--that he wasn't supposed to be doing.
That sort.
And one day, we were out playing,
and somebody passed the ball to me.
And, as per usual, he effortlessly
knocked me out of the way-- crudely and illegally,
which no one seemed to notice-- and then stole the ball.
And I was pissed.
And this guy quickly passed it to someone else.
And the two of us were sort of running
towards a corner of the field.
And momentum was carrying us.
And I sort of realized that the ball was now
kind of elsewhere in the field, and thus everybody's attention
was kind of elsewhere in the field.
So we're running along, and I'm, like, a half step behind him,
and I just stick my foot in front of his ankle
and send him rolling and--
[LAUGHTER AND SCATTERED APPLAUSE]
--sprawling, and this was the best-- heaven.
This was during the summer.
And it turned out there was a mud hole there.
It hadn't rained in six months.
This was wonderful!
So he goes-- and I didn't even go through the pretense of, oh,
are you OK?
Sorry about that.
It was just-- yeah!
[LAUGHTER]
I had to restrain myself from ripping
his stomach open with my canines, at that point.
So I felt wonderful!
This was, like, the best thing that
had happened to me in months.
[LAUGHTER]
Nelson Mandela.
[LAUGHTER]
Nelson Mandela.
Now in his 92nd year, frail-- frail.
An icon of all that is good and wonderful about humans.
This man on his last legs, now.
What if I had been playing soccer with Nelson Mandela
and I did that to him?
You'd be horrified!
Nobody would be on the edge of applauding that sort of thing.
This would be unspeakable, if I had
done that to delightful Nelson Mandela at age 92.
So what we see here is a very important thing
that is going to run through all of this topic.
Which is, very little about the social, the environmental,
the learning aspects of aggression
have to do with learning how to be aggressive.
It's all about when.
It's all about the appropriate social context for it.
Because that speaks to something that
is absolutely clear for 99.9% of us.
We do not want a world without violence.
We love violence.
We get excited by it.
We will pay good money to see the right displays
of competitive violence.
We will barely restrain ourselves
from leaping in and joining it.
It is all so wonderful and exciting.
We love violence-- when it's the right kind.
When it's in the right context.
And a huge percentage of wrestling
with this is built around the fact that, in some settings,
the exact same behavior gets you medals, gets you promotions,
gets you differential reproductive success.
And the exact same patterns of what you do with your muscles
in another setting is some of the worst things you could
do as a human to another human.
And it's the same behavior.
And what we're going to be wrestling with, over
and over and over, in the subject, as we march back,
here, is this whole issue of, very little about the biology
of violence, competition, all of that,
is about how to do the behaviors.
It is all about appropriate context.
And what we will see is, all sorts
of realms of neurological diseases, where things
go majorly wrong, in terms of control against violence--
very rarely will it be that it's the magnitude of violence which
is wrong.
What you see is, it's in the wrong context.
Because if it's done right we love it,
and we elect people who have been good at it,
and we differentially mate with them, and we pay to see it.
It's got to be in the right setting.
There are very few of us who viscerally are truly, truly
pacifists, all across the board.
We just don't like violence in certain settings.
So that will be part of the challenge,
here-- making sense of the biology of social context.
And we've already gotten some hints
about that in the last topic.
So, of course, what we have to start off with
is, like, definitions.
And it's never more in this realm
that you get the "I don't know how to define it,
but I know it when I see it" sort
of notion in dealing with terms for aggression and violence.
Probably a great starting point is,
just as with the sexual-behavior subject,
starting off with, well, what aspects
of violence and aggression are unique to humans?
And what the theme has been there, for decades now,
is all sorts of domains that used to be thought to be
unique to humans no longer are.
We've already heard some of these examples,
way back in the sociobiology lectures--
all of those wildlife films where, somewhere in there,
somebody with a very deep voice has to intone about how "only
man kills for pleasure"-- while watching some beasts throwing
the old wildebeest into the river, there,
and misinterpreting it.
And that was always the theme-- we're
the only species that kills.
And that went down the tubes, way back when,
as soon as people started seeing competitive infanticide.
That was first seen-- again, I think I
mentioned-- in langur monkeys.
A primatologist named Sara Hrdy, who
was at Harvard at the time-- and she
was the first to report this.
And-- this could not be!
That male langur monkeys were killing babies?
This was impossible.
And the interpretation was that this was a psychopathology.
This was because of increasing habitat degradation,
human populations getting closer, crowding them in.
These were populations of langur monkeys
in some urban areas in India, where she was studying them.
This is not normal, because no other species kills.
And now that it's up to 20, 25 different species
or so that does competitive infanticide,
it is quite clear we are not the only species that kills.
And we are not the only species that
kills in some premeditated, strategic, Machiavellian,
good for numbers of copies of our genes kind of way.
We are not the only ones-- Jane Goodall
by now having documented lots and lots of cases of murder
between chimps, females killing each other's babies,
males killing other males quite frequently.
And, once again, we are not the only species.
What's also become clear from more recent work
with chimpanzees is, we're not the only species
that makes weapons.
Chimps have now been observed to take large, heavy branches
and break off the ancillary branches,
there, and smooth it out and use it as a weapon,
to try to hit another animal.
This is tool use and tool production.
This is another species making a weapon.
We are also not the only species that has organized violence.
And this is back, again, to chimps.
Something mentioned way back when in the lectures--
the facts that chimps are female-exogamous,
that business that, at puberty, it's
the females who pick up and move to a different group.
All of the adult males in a chimp group
are relatively related to each other.
They are relatives.
And what you get, then, is cooperative aggression
among males from a particular group.
What you will see is border patrols.
Goodall was the first to use this term to describe it.
You will get-- the males of the group
will get into an extremely agitated state
with each other-- a state of emotional contagion,
where they build up this very high level of excitation.
And they then go and patrol the territory between their group
and the next group over.
And what Goodall was the first to document was,
if they encounter a male from the other group,
they will kill him.
And what she also documented was cases of groups of male chimps
systematically killing all of the males of the neighboring
group.
What is it that we've just seen, now, in another species?
Genocide-- the notion of killing an individual not because
of who they are but because of what group, what population,
they belong to, as part of a desire
to eradicate a population as a whole.
We are not the only species that has
something resembling genocide, if it's termed that way.
So where is a domain where we might be unique?
Lots of people still argue that humans
are the only species that psychopathologically confuse
sexual behavior with aggressive behavior-- world of sadism
and masochism and all of that.
That appears to be something resembling
a human-unique trait.
OK.
Now flipping to the more cheerful side of things--
the cooperation, the empathy stuff--
what aspects of those behaviors are unique to humans?
And what people used to think was
an exclusively human ability-- yeah?
Are there any instances where certain troops of monkeys
will not only just kill all the males in a different troop
but kill all females and infants, too,
as in [INAUDIBLE] genocide?
Yeah.
They will kill the infants, out of competitive infanticide
stuff.
And they will then happily hang with the females.
And do more than that, with any luck.
In terms of-- oh, a very familiar historical strategy
with humans, seen again and again.
Good end of things.
Used to be the rule that the humans were
the only species that showed reconciliation-- that
showed increased likelihood of affiliative behavior
between two individuals after they have
had an aggressive interaction.
In the aftermath of it, increased odds
of doing something affiliative-- making up-- reconciling.
Doing something along those lines.
And what has emerged in the last 20 years
or so is a huge literature showing reconciliative behavior
in a couple of dozen other species.
First person to report this-- primatologist Frans de
Waal, first reporting this in rhesus monkeys, I believe.
But lots of other species since then, including
dolphins, including whales.
And what you see is-- in the aftermath of a fight,
you see two individuals are more likely-- in gorillas,
for example, to do social grooming in the aftermath--
than at any other time.
An increased rate of that happening-- reconciliation.
What's remarkable is some of the subtleties in it.
And this was work that was done by Marina Cords, at Columbia.
And what she showed was, the odds of reconciliation
increase when it's a more important,
valuable relationship that you have.
How was she showing this?
These were studies with macaque monkeys.
And what she did was set up circumstances--
these were animals that were caged.
And there were circumstances where
she put food on a tray outside that could be reached for.
Where, in one setting, an animal could
get the food in all on its own.
And in another setting, the only way
to get the food tray close enough to the cage
was if both of them cooperated.
And this was what they were doing habitually.
So what's the difference, there?
In the second case, you have formed
this cooperative relationship with this other individual.
You need them, and they need you to pull off
this getting the food close to the cage business.
What she showed was significantly higher rates
of reconciliation between pairs that
have a history of cooperating.
What could that be interpreted as?
More of a game-theory history of cooperation
behind you-- more willingness to forgive.
Another way of framing it, as she does in her work,
is, this is a more valuable relationship that you
don't want to screw up.
You are more willing to do something reconciliative
afterward.
You can see, in baboons, reconciling behavior
in females.
No male baboons ever reconcile.
Showing gender differences, there.
In bonobos, you see reconciliation
is different from all these other species, where,
in all the other ones, it's built around social grooming
or chimp hugs or whatever.
There, of course, as you guessed it, it's sex.
Because with the bonobos, anything
that happens, and it's time to have sex.
But an interesting thing, in terms
of this picture of bonobos being this incredibly peaceful
species out there in this commune and all of that--
you can't have reconciliation unless you have aggression.
They do have aggressive interactions.
Otherwise, there would be nothing to reconcile afterward.
Even the beatific bonobos have a certain degree of aggression--
very high and varied rates, varied abilities,
to pull off reconciliative behavior afterward.
More things that used to be just about us.
Empathy.
And a literature now coming out, showing the building
blocks of that in other species, as well.
First example in chimps, second example in lab rats.
Chimp example.
Again, this was work done by Frans de Waal.
And wonderful study.
What he showed were two circumstances
where a male chimp would get pummeled.
First circumstance.
You've got this low-ranking male who goes up and threatens
and starts a fight with a higher-ranking male
and gets pummeled into the ground.
Second circumstance.
Low-ranking guy is sitting there,
minding his own business.
High-ranking guy is in a bad mood
and pummels him into the ground.
What's the difference?
In the first case, this kid started it,
by challenging the guy.
And in the second case, he was an innocent bystander.
And what de Waal showed is, in the half hour
after these incidents, the ones who were innocent bystanders
were far more likely to be groomed by females there
in the group than the ones who had started it.
They were able to distinguish between not just that this
is an individual who just got pounded
but whether it was their fault or not, or whether they
were a victim.
And considerably more grooming when it was an individual who
had been a victim.
Something resembling some proto empathy happening, there.
Remarkable study, published in Science a couple years ago.
A group from McGill.
And what they showed was arguing this is something
resembling empathy in rats.
Here's what they showed in the study.
What they had was, they-- let's see, how were they doing that?
They would have one rat that was restrained.
And rats don't like it.
And they would be giving off ultrasonic alarm calls.
Now you put a second rat, and you give them
a pain-threshold test.
Which is to say, you put them on a perfectly cool surface,
and you begin to warm it up, and you
see at what temperature do they first
lift up one of their paws.
And, quick, take them off at that point.
And what is their temperature threshold
for beginning to find this aversive?
And what they showed was that rats would have a lowered
threshold, would be more sensitive to this pain
stimulus, if they were next door to another rat giving off
alarm vocalizations.
But it was more subtle than that.
That would be easily described in terms of, OK, alarm calls,
and stressful, and just putting me in a more agitated state.
What they showed was, this only worked when it
was rats that were cagemates.
If it's rats that knew each other, hearing
the other rat in distress made you more sensitive to a pain
stimulus.
If it was a strange rat, it didn't work at all.
Some crude version of something resembling empathy, there.
So we're not the only species with it.
What's clear, though, is we are the only species that
could take it to just domains that
are utterly unrecognizable.
We are the only species that is moved
by people on the other side of the planet who have just
been in some catastrophe.
We are the only species moved by artwork that depicts suffering,
by movie characters, by fictional characters in books.
We are taken into realms that are unmatched elsewhere.
There's this wonderful video.
This was an advertisement for Ikea.
Has anyone seen this one, where the light gets thrown out?
Is there anyone who hasn't seen it?
OK, this is-- opens up.
It's this stormy, like, dismal, drizzling night, there.
And it's clearly freezing.
And you see-- coming into an apartment,
you see an old lamp sitting there,
with sort of a neck-type lamp thing.
And it's sitting there.
And suddenly this person appears, picks it up,
and walks outside into the rain and puts it
down next to the garbage can.
Oh!
It's being thrown out.
And now, thanks to brilliant photography and angles
that are shot just underneath the lamp,
there, you see it leaning there, looking miserable in the rain
and all alone with its light thing, there.
And you see, from this angle in the background,
there's the apartment, where it's
warm-- lights, and all of that.
And then you see the most heartbreaking thing.
You see the person come by the window, there-- the armchair--
and put down a new lamp-- a new lamp that's nicer.
And they even show the person-- just to really get the edge,
there-- briefly caressing the new lamp.
And then you get a shot back out again in the dark,
and it's pouring, and it's drizzling out.
And you're sitting there, feeling terrible
for this damned lamp, there.
How does this work?
And then, just to sort of show it, suddenly this person
appears in the screen and says, in effect,
what's wrong with you?
It's a lamp.
It's a lamp, and the new one works better.
And then on comes "Ikea," which I suspect
is not actually a good strategy, because you think of them
as heartless individuals who advocate
the abandonment of child lamps.
But, like, no hippo would know what
the deal is, while you're sitting there feeling sorry
for this piece of metal, there.
We have empathy-- not the only species,
but in very distinct and unique realms.
What else?
We are ostensibly the only species
with a sense of justice.
Again, that's not necessarily the case.
Again, work by Frans de Waal, whose name keeps coming up,
who is one of the best, most creative primatologists
in the universe.
This is work, now, where, again, chimps-- two chimps-- where
circumstances were, either it takes
one of them to pull a tray of food over,
or both of them to cooperate in order to get the food.
And what he shows is, after the cooperative relationship
has been established with them, if you
change the workings of it that it requires both of them
to pull the food in but the food winds
up going to only one of the chimps,
that champ is more likely to share
the food with the other individual
than if they didn't have a working-together relationship.
That chimp, on some Frans de Waal sort of level,
was feeling bad for the other guy getting a rotten deal.
Under those circumstances, if it was a chimp that you already
had a cooperative relationship with,
you were more likely to share with them
after they had gotten something aversive occur to them.
What else?
What else, in terms of making sense of other species--
what are unique, what are not?
Dominance hierarchies.
And if you come from a certain school of sociology,
humans are the least hierarchical species out there.
We are not territorial, in the sense of lots of other species.
We do not have strict hierarchies.
And what you see in other species
are hierarchies can mean very different things.
And the broad dichotomy that's made
is between top-down hierarchies and bottom-up ones.
Top-down, you have a single, dominating, most aggressive
individual who is up there on top.
And the characteristic of this-- it's also
called a "despotic" hierarchy-- is
extremely unequal distribution of resources
enforced by violence or threats of violence from above.
That's baboons.
That's chimps.
That's rhesus monkeys.
Then you look at vervet monkeys, and you
see a bottom-up, what is also termed "egalitarian,"
hierarchy.
There is a hierarchy, but the number one individual there
is only there with the cooperation of everyone else.
If that individual becomes abusive, they are overthrown.
So hierarchy does not, in other species,
automatically mean abusive, aggressive, dominating,
unequal-distribution stuff.
What it is is, it varies by species.
What also becomes clear, by the time you're
looking at other species, is it gets
really hard to figure out what does indeed count as violence.
Example-- East African primate called a "patas" monkey.
Go and study patas monkeys, and spend 40, 50,
60 years doing it, and what you will see
are virtually no instances of male patas monkeys
having fights with each other.
Wow!
That's a pretty unaggressive species.
That's kind of nice.
Put two male patas monkeys in a cage,
and not only will they start fighting soon afterward,
they will fight to the death.
Because they have no signals of terminating aggression.
What's the deal with that?
This is a species where the level of male-male tension
and male-male aggression is so high
that the entire social structure of these species
are built around keeping males as far apart as possible.
You don't see male patas monkeys having
fights, not because they're not aggressive
but because they live in these dispersed patterns.
So is this an aggressive species, or not?
This isn't an aggressive species; you never see a fight.
This is an insanely aggressive species;
the central feature of their social structure
is keeping violent males away from each other.
What does it count as?
What does it count as when you see an animal
leap on top of another animal and rip it to shreds?
Sometimes that's aggression, sometimes
that's getting dinner.
Once again, as with the sexual-behavior realm--
this whole realm, back to the limbic anatomy of,
are you looking at aggression?
Are you looking at predation?
These are totally different biological phenomena.
That takes some work.
What has always been one of the big questions
in the field is, so, what's the deal
with rough-and-tumble play?
What's play about?
Because you see it in endless species out there.
A lot of studies show that during periods of famine,
for example, one of the last behaviors that
disappears from kids is play.
It is really, really hard-wired in there.
So when you see aggressive play, is this truly aggression,
or is this practicing the building blocks
for the real stuff that will come later on?
What a lot of the primate studies
suggest is, it's not practice, it's not play,
it's already establishing some of the asymmetries that
will be there later in life.
OK.
So, all sorts of ways in which aggression
can pop up in other species, in unexpected realms,
in which cooperation, all sorts of things
like that-- what are some of the unique human ones?
Nonetheless, amid all those similarities,
we do things that are completely unprecedented.
We are perfectly capable of being
as violent as a chimp, when it comes to cudgeling somebody
over the head.
But we're the only species that could
be violent by doing nothing more physically taxing then
pulling a trigger or looking the other away or releasing
a bomb from 30,000 feet up in the air
or being passive-aggressive or damning with faint praise.
And we're suddenly doing all sorts of much more
subtle things with aggression.
Here's three examples of human aggression--
and I've heard about-- which shows
just how complex of a phenomenon this could be.
First one.
This was the child of a friend of mine,
when she was about five years old
and she was in kindergarten or pre-K or something.
And there was another kid there that she was not
getting along with.
And this was around Easter, and they were painting Easter eggs.
And some tussle came up between them.
And my friend's daughter broke the other kid's Easter egg.
Tears, hysteria, teachers swooping in to say,
you're not a bad child but you've done a bad thing,
and you can't do stuff like that.
And you are going to paint a new Easter egg, to give to her,
to make up for the one that you broke.
So my friend's kid proceeds to go to the corner
with this new egg and some paintbrushes.
And what becomes apparent after a while is she's sort of,
like, looking over her shoulder and working away on something,
here, and glowering back at everybody.
And finally she comes up to the other kid
and says, here's your stupid Easter egg, Happy Easter,
and gives her an egg that she's painted completely black.
[LAUGHTER]
OK.
What's with the aggression, here?
Easter eggs-- pastel colors, bunny
rabbits-- all that sort of thing.
Easter eggs are not supposed to be one solid color
and certainly not jet black.
That's not what-- what was she doing, here?
She was cooperating with the letter of the law
while doing as much violence to the spirit of the law as
possible.
What she was saying was, she is making
me paint this egg for you, and I don't like you one bit more
than 30 minutes ago.
And, showing that the other kid fully
understood what this human bit of passive-aggression
was about, she burst into tears as soon as she saw the egg.
Next example of the subtlety of human aggression.
And this one involved my wife.
OK.
[LAUGHTER]
So this was-- occasion.
We were, like, driving around somewhere-- minivan,
with our kids.
And some total jerk, like, cut us off.
And-- you know, he could have killed us and our kids,
and-- [GROWL OF FRUSTRATION].
My wife was driving.
And we sort of get past what should logically
have been about five seconds of cursing the person.
And she suddenly says, I'm going after this guy.
[LAUGHTER]
And she proceeds to trail the guy
and trails him for about two miles,
while I'm sitting there getting increasingly distressed
and panicked.
And eventually he, like, realizes
he's being followed now and is taking
sort of evasive maneuvers.
And eventually we get him on this street
where there's a red light, there, where
there's a car in front of him.
And then we're behind him.
So it's not like he could, in a panic,
go through the red light, there, because he's trapped there.
And we happen to know this was a very long red light.
While I've been sitting there, for the last five minutes,
saying, um, do you think this is really
a good-- [VROOM] go around another corner,
tracking him down.
So we're sitting there.
And suddenly my wife says, I'm going over there.
And she grabs something from between the seats and storms
out.
While I say, um, do you really think that's a good--
[LAUGHTER]
She's gone.
So I, like, get out, and I run over there.
And I see the window's down in the car.
And she's yelling at the guy.
And she says, anybody who could do something
like that needs this.
And she flings something at him.
So she comes back to the car, at that point.
And the light has changed.
And this guy, like, slinks off into the--
if it is possible for a car to look sheepish, moving, like,
four miles an hour, heads off into the sunset,
down this dark, little block, there.
So, sitting there.
And she's milking this for all it's worth.
And turn-- what did you put in there?
And she looks totally delighted with herself.
And she's, like, euphoric.
And I said, well, what did you say to him?
You-- what was that-- and she said,
anyone that could do anything this mean needs one of these.
And I said, what did you do then?
And she said, I threw a lollipop at him.
[LAUGHTER]
I said, whoa!
You killer, you!
You-- I was so proud of her.
My god, the violence intrinsic in that!
No other species would know what was that going on, there,
in terms of the intrinsic passive-aggression
and all of that.
We're the only ones who could come up
with something like that.
Third example.
Every day, out in Nevada, in a town there,
there are men who get up to go off to work,
and they kiss the family goodbye.
And they've got to get reminded to pick up the dry cleaning.
And they get in the car, and they're a little bit late,
and there's a lot of traffic, and they
get all stressed about the traffic jam.
But they get there to work on time.
And they're a little bit relaxed there.
And they finally can come in.
And they sit down in a chair in what
is a model of the cockpit of a fighter plane.
And what they do is control drone airplanes
on the other side of the planet, in Iraq.
And they spend the day, sitting there
at their work shift, controlling planes that
release bombs and missiles and destroy people
12,000 miles away.
So they spend the entire day, sitting
there in this air-conditioned room in Nevis Air Force Base,
just outside Las Vegas.
And they spend the day doing that.
And at the end of the day, they pick up,
and they tell everyone they'll see them tomorrow.
And they go pick up the dry cleaning.
And they go to their little daughter's ballet concert.
And afterward they hug her and can't
believe they could love somebody this much.
And then the next morning they go
back to spending their day killing people
on the other side of the planet.
There is not a whole lot of species out there
who could do that, either.
So by the time you're getting to us,
we have ways of being awful to other members of our species
that are simply unmatched.
And we have ways of being empathic, as well.
As we begin to wrestle, here, with the neurobiology
and endocrinology and finally walking our way back
towards the left, we're going to have this huge problem
of the context of aggression and this even huger problem of just
how complex aggression and empathy are,
when you leave it to humans.
Examples at the empathy end.
Human versions of it.
The things we are able to reconcile.
We are a species who has invented
truth-and-reconciliation commissions in South Africa,
in the Balkans, in Rwanda, where people face the person who
did that to them, the person who destroyed their life, destroyed
their family.
And going through what is by now a fairly well-worked-out
process that all sorts of people have studied.
And, in some of those cases, there is reconciliation.
There is even forgiveness.
How can this possibly happen?
We have a world where we try to have individuals
foster peace through the most unlikely of rationales.
I will let no man spoil my soul by causing me to hate him.
That is a psychology that is unprecedented.
We have the world of people like this Catholic nun, Sister Helen
Prejean, who has spent her entire career
ministering to the needs of men on death row
in a maximum-security prison in Louisiana.
She was the person who was featured in the movie
way back when, Dead Man Walking.
And what she spent a lot of her time doing
is having incredulous people, often
the relatives of the victims of these murderers,
come up and say, how can you do this?
How could you spend your life devoted to people like these?
And she comes up with an answer that
is so definedly human, that no other species could come near.
No matter how much they groom victims,
her answer always is, the less forgivable the act,
the more it must be forgiven.
The less lovable the person, the more they must be loved.
And suddenly we're in a world that the more something cannot
be, the more it must be, as a moral sort of act to do.
Whoa-- nobody out there in the animal kingdom
is going to have a clue what we're up to.
This is very complex terrain we are
going to deal with, here, as we now shift over
to the biology of it.
OK.
So, starting now with our strategy--
a violent act occurs.
An empathic act occurs.
Any in these categories.
What was going on in the brain, one second before?
And, of course, what do you know?
We're going to immediately going to land is,
right in the middle of the limbic system.
And, just as the Kluver-Bucy syndrome from the 1980s,
as we heard about last week-- just as that syndrome,
when you destroy the limbic system,
you get completely inappropriate sexual behavior in primates.
What those studies also showed was,
you get completely inappropriate aggressive behavior.
OK.
So, with 80-year-old research, we've
now landed in the limbic system.
What are the subregions that are relevant?
The area that comes in at the top of the list,
immediately, that we've already heard a fair amount about,
is the amygdala.
The amygdala and its role in fear,
its role in anxiety-- that strange role,
in males, of sexual motivation.
But what the amygdala is most renowned for
is its role in aggression.
And, as I emphasized last week, it
is mighty interesting, I think, that the part
of the brain which is most responsive to when you are
scared is the part of the brain that
generates the starts of aggressive behavior.
Again, in a world in which no neuron need be afraid,
we're going to have a lot fewer aggressive amygdalas out there.
What's the evidence?
You know the drill by now.
You go and you destroy the amygdala in an animal,
and you are incapable of eliciting aggression from them.
You go and you do the same thing in a human,
and you get the exact same result.
One of those dark, horrible chapters
in the history of science-- another realm
of legally enforced psychosurgery.
This was a trend that was very, very popular
in the '60s and '70s-- court-ordered amygdalectomies
of people.
And this was a technique where people
would go in with a lesioning syringe into each side--
the amygdala is a bilateral structure-- there's
two of them, way deep in the brain--
and go in and destroy the structure.
And this would decrease aggression.
This would decrease all sorts of stuff.
This wound up on the front page of the New York Times
when, around 1970, three neurosurgeons at Harvard
wrote a letter to the New York Times, pointing out
there's this great surgical technique
which they were the pioneers of where
you could take aggressive humans and make
them less aggressive with no other side effects.
You could make them less aggressive.
And haven't you been noticing that our inner cities have been
burning and rife with violence?
Maybe it's time to start thinking about doing
some of these preemptively.
This was a letter from these three guys
from Harvard Med School.
No surprise, not everybody sort of
thought this was the swellest idea that they had ever heard.
This generated this huge fight over the psychosurgical use
of court-enforced amygdalectomies.
And before it was over with, it had just as bad of a history
as frontal lobotomies.
People subjected to amygdalectomies
because they were argumentative, because they, as teenagers,
didn't listen to their parents.
They didn't listen to their teachers.
Thousands of cases of these.
The one thing that was clear was that, yes, indeed,
aggressive behavior would decrease in these individuals.
There would not be a whole lot of a person left afterward.
So, lesioning evidence.
Stimulation evidence.
You know the flip side of that by now.
Now stick an electrode into the rat's amygdala
and stimulate, electrically stimulate, there.
And you produce wildly aggressive behavior.
And you see two equivalents of that in humans.
And in both of these cases, stupendously rare.
First is a very, very, very rare type
of epilepsy, where what you get is
the epileptic focus, the place where the seizure begins,
is in the amygdala.
What you see is, with most types of epilepsy,
the place where it starts in the brain, a seizure,
tells you a whole lot about matching with the behavior.
People, just before the onset of the seizure,
will get olfactory auras-- two or three
seconds of hallucinating an odor.
That's a seizure that's starting somewhere down
in the olfactory part of the limbic system.
You see all sorts of cases.
There have been documented cases of epileptics
who see a mathematical equation for two seconds
before the seizure hits.
And that's an area of the cortex where it turns up.
Auditory seizures, where they hear two measures of music--
the same two measures before it hits.
What you see when you've got these rare epilepsies, where
the seizure begins in the amygdala, is,
two seconds before, the person becomes furious.
They-- I can't bel-- I am so ang-- and then it happens.
So, uncontrolled stimulation in the amygdala, and you
get some aggression there.
The next thing that you see is evidence
of the amygdaloid stimulation.
OK.
Anybody ever hear of a guy named Charles Whitman?
Hands-- oh, what are they teaching you guys, here?
OK.
Charles Whitman was once America's record-holding mass
murderer.
And he was the best that we could come up
with in the early 1960s.
And, oh, his records have been eclipsed
by so many people since then.
But he was once our gold-medal mass murderer.
This was the guy who, in 1962, I think,
climbed up the famed clock tower at the University of Texas,
Austin, campus and opened fire on people below.
And then killed himself, afterward.
This was the first of the rounding up the neighbors
to say, oh my god, he was such a quiet guy-- he
was such a nice neighbor.
This was the first of the literal choirboys-- my god,
where did this come from-- no hint of anything.
On postmortem, he was found to have a tumor in his amygdala.
Another rare case of that.
During the 1970s, there was an extreme leftist terrorist group
in Germany called the Baader-Meinhof gang.
And these were the two people who began it.
And one of the two stupendously violent people-- one of the two
found, on postmortem, to have a tumor in her amygdala.
So these very, very rare cases of this,
fitting with this theme-- circumstances
that increase the metabolism in the amygdala.
Out comes aggressive behavior.
More evidence.
Now, another strategy from the limbic lectures.
Put in the electrode.
This is one that responds to electrical signaling.
Show somebody something that evokes
aggression, and their amygdala has gotten activated.
Do the same thing, now, with a human.
Put them in a brain scanner, and show them
something that evokes anger.
And the metabolic rate in their amygdala activates.
So you see all sorts of circumstances
where you can document the amygdala as playing this role.
Interestingly, the amygdala gets bigger, as we've heard,
in people with posttraumatic stress disorder.
And what you see there is also increased
frequency of violent behavior.
More evidence that the amygdala plays a role-- and this
was a very subtle finding.
This was from-- oh my god, the clock in the back!
Turn around and look at that clock.
[LAUGHTER]
Everybody run!
[LAUGHTER]
OK, well, now that it's almost done,
I'll mention the very last thing, here.
These were studies done showing-- OK,
people with amygdaloid lesions, they
are very bad at detecting faces expressing angry emotions.
They are more trusting of people than average individuals are.
They are more likely to forgive.
They are less capable of picking up on any of that information.
And a wonderful study done by this guy, Antonio Damasio--
again, one of the lead figures in the field.
What he did was eye tracking on people with amygdaloid lesions.
You get someone with this part of the brain destroyed,
and they don't look at the eyes of other people.
When they examine faces, they're looking at the nose.
They're looking at the chin.
They're not directing their gaze to be able to pick up accurate
information about emotions.
So what do we see, here?
The amygdala not only responds to aggression
and fear-provoking stimuli.
The amygdala is able to direct you to look for it.
And what we will see on Wednesday is,
one of the things testosterone does in males
is it makes them look harder.
 Picking up from Monday, OK, so we are now well
into our second topic of the second half,
looking at aggression, competition, cooperation,
empathy, all those guys.
And we've got the drill down by now, starting with behavior
all the way to the right, working our way to the left
all the way back to evolution, genetics, blah, blah.
Where we left off the other day was just
getting into the first box worth of what's
going on in the brain?
What is the neurobiology of what's occurring seconds
before that aggressive act, that compassionate act, all of that?
As we know already, right in the middle of the limbic system,
of course, as we know already, the amygdala
is playing a really central role,
and seeing all the evidence for it--
lesion studies, stimulation studies, the bizarre rarer
realm of humans who have had lesions, or stimulation
there, accidents, or intentional psycho surgical interventions,
beginning to look at the amygdala there,
and the role that it plays.
Now, part of what becomes relevant
there is seeing the kind of information
that the amygdala is getting.
And an important thing to focus on
is something that was mentioned back
in the limbic lecture, the notion we
ended with the other day, the amygdala.
OK, so you look at somebody who has had amygdala damage.
And they tend to not be able to detect fear-evoking faces.
They are overly trustful.
They are underlie skeptical.
They are not taking in the sort of information
we would that leads us to conclude
this is a circumstance that demands arousal,
vigilance, so on.
One of the things that was seen, interesting study
that I noted at the end the other day,
was looking at people with amygdala lesions, Damasio
and his group looking at this, keeping track of where
the eyes are looking.
When they see another face, they are not looking with the eyes
any or near as much as everybody else would.
They are instead tracking around all sorts of extraneous parts
of the face.
Normally, people look at the eyes a whole lot.
And what that winds up showing is not only
is the amygdala playing a role in deciding
this is a fear or aggression-evoking stimulus,
the amygdala is also on the lookout for it.
And what we will see in a little while is one of the things
testosterone does is make the amygdala better
at looking for fear and anger-evoking faces.
So part of what the amygdala is doing
is taking in sensory information.
We touched in the limbic lecture on one interesting aspect
of it.
OK, back to that business, that the limbic strategy
of counting the number of synapses, that strange business
about olfaction being only one synapse away
from lots of parts of the limbic system,
including the amygdala if you were dealing
with a [INAUDIBLE], the olfactory world
as being so emotional for a rodent.
For us, we've got something else interesting happening.
And I think I mentioned this.
OK, so you've got the visual system.
And what we have is the usual rule
that visual information-- just like auditory,
just like tactile-- comes in, and goes
by way of a way station along the way, whose name we won't
worry about, and goes through all these levels
of cortical processing, and [? bio cort ?] people
will remember layer one, doing dots, to lines,
to moving lines, all of that, eventually processing
assessment, come up with an idea that, oh, dear,
this is a menacing face.
And then let the amygdala know about this.
What was also found a number of years ago
is that there is a shortcut.
There is a branch coming off of this way station called
the lateral geniculate.
There's a branch coming off, which then is only one
synapse away from the amygdala.
What we heard is that's really useful,
in that it can get you fear-evoking, arousing
information that much faster than going through all
this cortical processing.
It is a short cut.
It is not a one synapse away.
But it certainly makes for fewer synapses.
That's a faster system that we've
got in order to very quickly pick up
information that should be of interest
to the amygdala and all of its fear, anxiety,
aggression-type concerns.
So that's wonderful.
That's terrific for the amygdala.
What I think we also heard it is it
comes with a downside, which is you send all this information
through all these different steps
there because it's doing all this cortical processing
for you.
It's figuring out all the details
of the sensory information you're getting in.
This way, it gets to the amygdala faster.
But what gets there is less accurate.
You're more likely to make a mistake.
And that's the whole world of people reacting really quickly
to some peripheral piece of information,
which turns out to be different than they thought it was.
And before they knew it, they had reacted.
This is the cortex sitting there, still trying to decide,
is this a three-dimensional object
or a two-dimensional one?
And through this route, you've already stabbed the individual.
This is a very, very clear trade-off-- faster information,
less accurate.
And there is, by now, a lot of evidence
to suggest that this particular pathway is
hyper excitable in individuals with post-traumatic stress
disorder, where that whole world of all sorts
of acute sensory stimuli suddenly fling the person back
into where they were when that happened to them,
and without the processing time to figure out,
this isn't exactly the same.
In fact, this is a world away from where that happened.
Already, the amygdala is responding.
So these short cuts-- but telling you,
one of the things you give up with the short cuts
is the analytical accuracy.
OK, so amygdala for that, amygdala equals fear,
equals anxiety, equals aggression.
Isn't that interesting?
In a world in which amygdala is not afraid,
there's no aggression, that whole theme there.
The amygdala isn't always about fear,
and aggression, and anxiety.
And it's very informative, the examples
where that's not the case.
One case, really interesting syndrome
called Williams syndrome, which we're
going to hear a lot about in the language lecture.
Williams syndrome appears to be a poorly understood imprinted
genetic disorder where you get, among other things,
kids who are unbelievably facile with language
and emotional expressivity.
This whole world of Williams kids,
it's this fascinating disorder where
you get kids who are basically borderline retarded in terms
of cognitive function.
Yet, they have this spectacular adeptness at language,
at reading emotions in other people, at communicating them.
They are famously affectionate kids
amid being very cognitively impaired.
We'll see in the language lecture,
most people think about Williams syndrome
as an interesting example of the modularity of language
control in the cortex.
You can have very, very facile language skills
in these individuals who, nonetheless, are typically
in the IQ range of about 70, argument being,
we'll see in a couple of weeks, that there are specialized
cortical areas for language.
For our purposes, the interesting thing
about Williams kids, and eventually Williams adults,
is they are extremely trustful.
They are extremely gregarious.
They are incredibly vulnerable as adults
to being taken advantage of by other people.
And what you see with Williams individuals is you basically
cannot evoke amygdala activation with scary faces.
They don't register in someone with Williams.
So there, we see that this is not universally
serving that role.
Another example where there seems
to be an exception until you think about it
a little bit, people with social phobias.
What studies have shown is, show a social phobic
any sort of face-- human face-- and their amygdala activates.
Oh, that's not telling us anything informative.
It's telling us something very informative,
which is if you have a severe social phobia,
any face is a scary face to you.
All faces do that, rather than only ones communicating
certain threatening emotions.
Another one that seems puzzling, but which
then makes perfect sense when you think about it, when
you take people with clinical depression the amygdala
doesn't necessarily activate when
you show them a picture of something frightening.
It activates when you show them a picture of something sad.
OK, so now instead of doing fear and depression,
the amygdala does sadness or something.
If you think about it for a minute,
that makes perfect sense.
What the amygdala might very well be doing
is responding to whatever it is that is most ethologically
frightening to you-- you as a species, you as an individual.
If you are somebody who's depressed,
the most frightening thing on Earth
is something sad around you, as more justification for feeling
even more depressed, the amygdala being far more
subtle than, oh, here's a scary predator with a knife coming
at me, very much contextual.
OK, another thing that the amygdala is brilliant at,
which we will come back to in more detail,
but on a first pass it is so depressing,
is the amygdala is probably the part of your brain
that is best at doing dichotomizing between us
and them-- forming categories in-group, out-group,
and responding to out-group stimuli.
And we will see two things down the line, probably on Friday.
Number one, it is really, really depressing
how readily the amygdala forms some
of these us-them dichotomies, and the sort of them
that it responds to-- really depressing.
But also some good news in there,
remarkably subtle social manipulations that
will change the sort of us-them dichotomies
that the amygdala responds to.
So stay tuned for that.
OK, so shifting from the amygdala,
going to the incredibly interesting and important
frontal cortex.
And frontal cortex, obviously, was doing all sorts of stuff
two lectures ago in the sex lecture,
getting you to have the appropriate context
for sexual behavior, getting to do the harder thing,
like leaping over streams, and head butting
with other antlered beasts if that's
part of your mating season.
Where the frontal cortex is particularly involved
is this whole world of regulating appropriate behavior
in the context of violence, aggression, competition,
cooperation.
Frontal cortex is incredibly important here.
OK, back to the limbic lecture-- the limbic system
is about sub-cortical structures underneath, things like that.
And the cortex is about the cortex.
And we heard in the limbic lecture,
instead what was originally that heretical view
by that neuroanatomist Nauta saying,
actually, the frontal cortex is part of the limbic system.
It should be viewed as such.
And over the years since, it being viewed as,
this is the cortical part of the limbic system.
This is the cortical region that is intensely involved
with limbic function, with emotional function.
On an anatomical level, what we've already seen
is just as a first pass, tons of bidirectional connections,
everything in the limbic system talking
to the frontal cortex, frontal cortex
sending projections back over the limbic system.
So anatomically, it's there.
So in terms of what it's doing-- the best way to describe what
the frontal cortex is about is when there's
a choice between doing something harder and something easier,
and the harder thing is the better thing to do,
it's the thing that makes you do the harder thing.
And we'll see this plays out in all sorts
of domains, the frontal cortex getting
you to do the harder thing.
First beginning to see the way it works in terms of wiring--
OK, here we have reduced the entire world
down to a simplified, there's two neurons
that account for all the easier things you do in your life.
And there's three neurons that account
for all the harder ones.
Here, we have some circumstance where
there's a circuit at some juncture, the easier but less
desirable outcome.
Behavior is this way, the harder one that way.
And what you see is this has more inputs then this one.
This is obviously some entire circuit of neurons.
And this is highly simplified, blah, blah.
But what we see is the way it's set up here
is that there are more inputs into this pathway.
This is what makes this neuron easier
to activate than this one.
There are stronger inputs into this pathway.
This one has only two axons going to it.
This one has three-- yes, simplified.
When you look at the wiring of the frontal cortex,
it's sending projections all over the limbic system,
all over motor areas.
A characteristic of the projections
is that very rarely are they very strong projections
to any given target area.
They're not the sort of projections where, here's
this frontal cortical neuron that is now
dumping all of its axon terminals into this one neuron
down there.
It does not exert a very strong influence
over the excitation of any given neuron.
Instead, what it has is a whole lot of weak but diffuse
projections.
What is the frontal cortex doing?
It's slowly massaging the area there.
It is giving biasing bits of de-polarization of excitation.
So what we've got here is-- OK, the numbers
are not quite working.
But in any case, what we have here is,
here's doing the right thing that's harder.
And it's a lot harder to get this neuron
to do the right thing that's harder,
because there is less of an input than this pathway.
What the frontal cortex tends to do
is have these relatively weak inputs into all these systems
where it makes it a little bit harder to just fall
for this one.
It gives more strength into this pathway.
The frontal projections very rarely
are activating on their own.
Yes, indeed, we have another example here of modulating.
If and only if this pathway is already
struggling to do the right thing,
the frontal cortex tends to be able to push it
over the top there to pull it off.
Frontal projections as very diffuse, relatively weak,
but biasing towards excitation, rather than causing it,
that tends to be the thing that it does.
What you see in terms of making sense of frontal function
is, as we heard the other day also,
a huge whopping projection from that nucleus accumbens.
You remember ventral tegmental, nucleus accumbens,
this huge dopamine releasing projection into there.
And on a certain level-- you want a totally useless
metaphor, but on a certain level with the dopamine projection
is about is-- so here, you've got the frontal cortex.
The frontal cortex, for a living,
makes you do the harder thing when
it's the right thing to do.
Dopamine is, in a sense, the fuel for that activity.
Dopamine, the expectation, the anticipation, the capacity
of dopamine to generate goal-directed behaviors
is heavily running through this pathway.
Dopamine is a thing that's giving,
in a sense, the frontal cortex the energy
to just push you over the edge, and to tell you,
yes, go this way instead of this way, which also intrinsic
in this lots and lots of frontal projections that are inhibitory
in that realm.
An awful lot of what frontal cortex is also doing
is whispering to this pathway saying,
you really shouldn't do that.
You're going to regret it.
I know it's tempting right now.
Don't do it, don't do it-- this super ego sort of neuroanatomy
there of frontal cortex, dopamine as very strongly
stimulatory in there, the whole role of dopamine
as driving goal-directed behavior.
And that was that critical business we saw in that study
showing you let the monkey know that it's now entered one
of those periods where if it lever presses,
it gets the reward.
Oh, I know just how this works-- anticipation, that's great.
Up goes dopamine.
If you prevent the dopamine from going up,
you don't get the lever pressing.
Dopamine is not just about anticipation.
Dopamine is about driving the behavior needed
to get the reward that you are anticipating,
dopamine as goal-directed behavior.
OK, so what you begin to see in terms
of how this frontal cortex does this making
you do the harder thing, it's manifest in all sorts
of domains.
Easiest, most accessible realm is
seeing what it has to do with cognition,
the way in which the frontal cortex gets
you to do the harder thing.
What it helps you to do is organize bits of information
in ways that makes it easier to make sense of.
Here is, if you ever find yourself being borderline
demented, and somebody is giving you a test,
this is one of the tests they're going to give you.
So start preparing.
This is this horrifying test called
the CVLT-- the California Verbal Learning Task
or some such thing like that.
But here's what they do.
Some neuropsychologist sits you down.
And says, oh, I'm just going to tell you something,
a list of things here.
See if you can remember.
Today I went to the market.
And I bought one tomato, one hammer, one box of cereal,
one grape, one-- and goes through a list of 16
of these, one every second or so.
And they finish.
And they say.
OK, do you happen to remember what I bought at the market
today?
Oh my God, it is so stressful.
So you manage to get out like maybe seven of them correct.
And the person says, OK, that's very good.
Let's do that again.
Today, I went to the market.
And I brought one tomato, one hammer, one box of Cheerios,
one box of-- and goes through this list again,
and seeing each time how many of them you remember,
beginning to see your memory acquisition
thing as you're getting closer and closer to remembering
all 16.
It's not until you're maybe in the third or fourth round
of doing this that you begin to notice
something, which is of the 16 items four of them are fruits.
Four of them are hardware items.
Four of them are bread cereal things.
Four of them are who knows what.
And they're scattered throughout.
What the people typically start doing
by the third or fourth one is you begin to group
them by categories.
And instead of remembering back OK, tomato, hammer, cereal,
fruit, whatever, you first tell the three out of the four
fruits that you remember.
Then you tell the two out of the four hardware items.
You are beginning to group the information.
And what that is called is executive function.
Executive organizing strategy, it
is sheer memory systems that are remembering these 16 factoids.
It is executive organizing that's telling you,
do you notice some patterns there?
Don't just remember it in sequence.
Don't try to just remember it in sequence.
Stop for a second.
And try to keep track of the categories,
because that's going to be a better
strategy in the long run.
That's what the frontal cortex does.
You get someone with frontal cortical damage,
and their capacity to remember, the learning curve
is not all that different from anyone else.
But they never start doing the grouping.
They never start doing what we might think of as almost
cognitive strategizing.
Oh, I see a pattern here.
And I suspect if I put the effort into exploiting
that pattern, it's going to make it more productive for me
to try to remember things rather than just trying
to do it in sequence.
So the frontal cortex is good for that.
Where else do you get in the cognitive realm
the frontal cortex getting you to do the harder thing?
Where you get all this information
in the cognitive realm is when you study people
with frontal damage-- either people with accidents,
or very often older individuals who have strokes there.
There's a very distinctive type of dementia
that takes out the frontal cortex called
frontotemporal dementia.
And all sorts of cognitive tests in those cases
showing in the cognitive realm what
happens when you're not having this going on
throughout all the circuitry.
One thing that would be given-- OK,
so you sit down this individual.
And you say, OK, you recognize this, don't you?
Even though most of you guys don't by now growing up
in the digital era.
But this is the face of a clock.
And it comes with a little hand and a big hand.
And they point in informative directions.
So you ask the person, OK, you recognize this.
Of course, this is a clock face.
Now, where would you draw the hands
if I said the time was 11:10?
11:10, so sit for a minute, and think about where.
And, of course, it's 10 minutes after 11:00.
And that's that where the hands would go.
Someone with frontal damage, instead, would draw the hands
at 11 and 10.
What are the rest of us doing?
We're saying, OK, the easier thing
is to just get gummed up on the number 11
and the number 10-- wait, wait, don't do that.
Hold on, remember, 10 is a coding
for multiples of five minutes, because that's
the way clocks are organized.
So 10 is actually two of these.
So it's 11:10.
10 is a shorthand for saying 10 minutes after.
And you put your hands in the right place.
Somebody with frontal damage can't hold off.
And they get pulled by the easiest interpretation
of the sound 11:10.
They draw the hands at 11 and 10.
So this is what you would see.
More examples-- what the frontal cortex is good at
is getting you to inhibit the easier
route when it is a very well-learned, very
well-conditioned one.
Here's what you would do.
Now you take the person who you think
may have some frontal damage.
And you say, OK, here's a task I want you to do.
Starting with December, tell me the months
of the year backwards.
What have we all learned since way back in first grade
or whatever?
That this is an easy thing going forward.
This is the harder thing right now.
And you will see a person with frontal damage
will say OK, December, November, October, September, October,
November, December.
They manage to pull it off for a while.
And then they just slip on the ice back into the easier way.
It is, you normally have December followed
by January, not by November.
It takes more work to do it that way.
People with frontal damage, they have this intrusion.
They can't hold off the over-learned response,
the more habitual response.
You would then see with frontal damage something
that's termed intrusions.
Now you would say to the same person, OK, that's great.
That's great.
Now what I want you to do is start with the number 20
and count backwards.
And the person will say, OK, 20, 19, 18, 17, September, October,
November, December.
And they've slipped back into the previous task.
They don't have the effort here to say,
we've stopped it with the months already.
Now we're doing numbers.
Don't slip back into that month stuff.
But, yet, that's exactly what occurs.
You take somebody with frontal damage.
You give them would be called a verbal fluency test.
You say, OK, one minute, tell me as many words
as you could think of starting with the letter F. Great.
Now tell me as many words as you could
think of starting with the letter M, with the letter P,
so on.
And you go with the letter M. And by the fifth word,
they're back to words with F. The previous task intrudes
in there.
It has trouble organizing, strategizing,
we're done with the letter F. We're
done with doing the months.
Concentrate now, we're doing the letter
M. We're doing numbers backwards.
Don't fall for the easy version of just saying 11:10.
This is the stuff the frontal cortex does.
This is what it looks like when you are getting damage
to the frontal cortex.
So cognitive aspects of that-- what's
the frontal cortex particularly good at in the cognitive realm?
It is making you work, and work, and work for a cognitive reward
way down the line.
And that's the entire world of all of you guys already
gunning for the perfect GPA that will get you
into a good nursing home someday.
That is your frontal cortex working to your advantage.
That's your frontal cortex doing that, this task
of gratification postponement.
Do the harder thing.
Where am I going to get the energy for it?
It's these frontal inputs that's just
biasing so I could do the harder pathway rather than the easier.
You find this also when you're doing electrophysiological,
when you're recording, you're sticking in electrodes,
and seeing when neurons are excited.
Suppose, for example, you've got a monkey.
And you are recording.
You have electrodes both in the visual cortex
and some other ones in the frontal cortex.
And, again, this is one of those tasks where
when the bell sounds-- bells don't beep,
when some buzzer beeps, it means to the monkey, now,
OK, every time the light goes on,
you have to press a lever three times.
And you get a reward.
That's the rule.
Buzzer means we're starting one of those testing sessions
again.
Light comes on, hit lever, light comes on, hit lever.
So you record from the visual cortex.
And here's what's happening.
This is when the buzzer comes on saying,
oh, we've just started one of these test periods.
And now the light flashes.
And the visual cortex activates each time.
What's going on in the frontal cortex?
The second the buzzer goes off, the frontal cortex activates.
And it stays up the whole time.
What is the visual cortex coding for?
Individual examples of this task.
What's the frontal cortex coding for?
It's remembering the rule.
OK, the buzzer went on.
That means-- now, remember, remember,
remember for the next whatever period of time, get ready.
Every time the light flashes, hit the lever there.
The task of the frontal cortex is
to maintain the rule throughout, transcending
the individual examples of it.
So you can already see where we're
heading with moral development in kids,
and frontal maturation.
And all of that's going to fit in really
well, the frontal cortex doing stuff like that.
What you should begin to notice is intrinsic in all of this,
the frontal cortex is sending these projections
all over the brain.
The frontal cortex does not code for individual examples
of rules, but instead maintains rules for long, long periods.
The frontal cortex works really hard.
Frontal cortical neurons have very high metabolic rates.
And a whole world of neurology, thus, is built around the fact
that frontal cortical neurons are very fragile.
They die very readily.
All sorts of neurological disorders
damage the frontal cortex with behavioral changes
that go along with that.
So you've got the wiring, the patterning, all of that.
But then at some point you wonder, well, I
learn all sorts of rules.
Back when I was about three years old,
I learned this rule having to do with no more diapers.
And if you go to the potty, you get M&Ms.
And, in fact, I sort of have internalized this.
And same does that mean the, you need to go to the bathroom
now is internalized that there's a frontal cortical neuron that
got excited when I was three years old
and got toilet trained, and has been firing ever since then?
No, what you see after a while is the frontal cortical realm
of remember.
Remember, you go to the bathroom when you need to do this.
Remember, remember, you say the months forward.
Remember all these sorts of things.
At some point, it becomes automatic.
It becomes reflexive.
And what is seen is at that point,
the frontal cortex stops being the area that is active.
At some point, instead, it becomes
implicit procedural pathways.
It gets stored elsewhere in the brain.
What you see in individuals with Alzheimer's disease
where you get a lot of damage to the hippocampus
and the cortex-- particularly the frontal cortex-- what
you see is all sorts of things that were learned way back
when, and learned enough to just be habitual,
people can still do.
You will have somebody who is demented enough that they
cannot tell you what decade it is, the name of their spouse,
the name of their children, how many children they have,
whatever.
But this is someone who still knows how to knit.
They learned when they were seven years old how to knit.
And now 80 years later, they can still do that.
This is not the frontal cortex remembering the knitting rules
for the last 70 years or so.
This is, it became automatic and got moved elsewhere.
And a whole bizarre world you see
with frontal damage in individuals
with these dementias where some of the things that
become automatic are remarkable, suggesting that you've
got storage capacity in other places in the brain
when you don't have to consciously
think about it, when something has become so automatic.
You go to the bathroom when you need to void your bladder.
OK, we don't have to think about that anymore.
It has now gotten to a pathway like this.
Other brain regions particularly, the cerebellum,
seems to play a larger role in that.
Stay tuned.
We are going to be getting to a very interesting point
about moral development in kids.
When do certain moral rules stop having
to be coded in the frontal cortex,
and instead become as habitual as toilet training?
We'll see some really interesting implications
of that.
OK, so what do you see when you get frontal damage?
You get all these cognitive problems there,
and these problems with doing the harder but more correct
thing cognitively.
You see it as well in terms of doing
the harder but more correct thing in terms
of behavior, social behavior.
First classic example of this, they
take away your neurobiology license
if you don't mention this guy at some point.
How many of you have heard to Phineas Gage?
How many of you have not heard of Phineas Gage?
OK, time for Phineas Gage.
OK, but the ones who have heard of him, let's
all say this in unison.
OK, Phineas Gage was the first identified individual
to have massive frontal damage.
Phineas Gage was a foreman on a railroad construction
line in Vermont in the 1840s.
One day, thanks to somebody or other doing something wrong,
there was an explosion of some dynamite, which
blew a large metal rod through his forehead
and out the other side, taking out his frontal cortex
in the process.
And this was rather dramatic.
And this was this large metal pole
that went through fast enough that, in fact, cauterized
all the blood vessels.
And you can see that metal pole at the museum in the Harvard
Med School Library, where you can also
see his skull, which is very interesting,
because the rest of Phineas Gage is about 20 miles from here
buried in Colma.
So I don't quite know how his skull wound up
at that end of the country.
But in the either case, he was buried in San Francisco,
minus-- well, I guess the Dean of Harvard Med School swooped
in.
And before you knew it, the skull was on its way
east there with the metal rod.
But in any case, OK, so Phineas Gage
had his frontal cortex splattered 15 feet behind him.
And what happened was, amazingly,
because it went through with such force and so fast,
that it cauterized all the blood vessels,
he was actually, like, able to get up at that point.
And, most remarkably, with a bunch of people from work,
he was able to walk a mile and a half
to the nearest doctor, who being a good diagnostician,
took a look at Phineas Gage, and tilted his head back.
And looked, and he said, whoa, you've
got a hole there in your head, and was
sort of looking in more detail, and saying,
whoa, you've got frontal cortex got blown out of your head
there.
And this was sort of the peak of diagnostic skills at the time.
But what happened was the boss there on the railroad line
said, Gage, you know what?
Take the rest of the day off.
See you tomorrow.
So Gage goes home.
And the next day he returns, not just figuratively but literally
transformed overnight.
Gage, who was this sober, sobrietous,
religious man, highly reliable foreman of this entire work
place, et cetera.
Gage was never able to work a day steadily
for the rest of his life.
He became this brawling, abusive, sexually predatory,
out of control individual.
And that original doctor, seeing what he turned into,
was the first one who said, well,
whatever that part of the brain was that got taken out there,
whatever it was, that part of the brain
reigns in our animal energies.
And 170 years later, there's not a hugely better definition
out there as to what the frontal cortex is about.
So Phineas Gage being the official first one,
and you learn all about this guy.
But very interestingly, about a year ago somebody
found the very first photograph of Phineas Gage.
And go look at that online.
What's interesting is he looks like a perfectly normal guy.
The pole took out his eye along with the frontal cortex.
And, obviously, there was that problem.
But this is, like, the face of somebody from the 1850s.
And there's something, I don't know,
I found very moving about seeing this face
that everybody learns about Phineas Gage.
And everybody has seen his skull, and the reconstruction
of the accident.
And that's right.
This was, like, a regular old person
whose life was completely destroyed
when the frontal cortex scattered
all behind him there-- remarkable first example
of that.
Since then, most of the evidence for what frontal cortex is
about from damage is older individuals
who have stroke damage to the frontal cortex.
And what I mentioned, I think, in the limbic lecture,
one example of what this looks like was
a horrifying case in a facility in the East Bay
some years ago where an 80-year-old man who
had had extensive frontal damage due to a stroke
was found to have raped an 80-year-old woman
with Alzheimer's disease.
This is what frontal damage looks like in an 80-year-old.
Here's something very interesting to consider,
and seeing exactly the terrain we're
heading into here with this sort of information,
approximately 25% of men on death row in this country
have a history of concussive head trauma
to the front of their head.
Front of the head, where you wind up
damaging the front of the brain, frontal cortical damage.
And what we enter into here is this whole realm
where this stuff is stupefyingly relevant to making sense
of criminal behavior in humans-- possibilities
of frontal damage.
Currently, there is one law that's
on the books in the majority of states in this country
for deciding when somebody is so organically impaired that they
count as having an insanity defense,
rather than being criminally culpable for their acts.
And this is something called the McNaughton rule.
McNaughton rule, everybody gets taught.
What the McNaughton rule is, can the individual
tell the difference between right and wrong?
This is the gold standard in courts
as to whether or not somebody gets a organically impaired
insanity defense ruling or not.
McNaughton, whose work was all of this cutting edge
neurobiology was based on, McNaughton was most probably
a paranoid schizophrenic, a guy in 1840
who attempted to assassinate the Prime Minister of England,
and was so clearly, clearly psychotic
that this was the first case of the jury
formally saying that, no, there is something
too sick about this man to hold him responsible for his acts.
And the clearest thing that came through in that trial
was, he could not distinguish right from wrong.
And the sort of thing that absolutely
does in somebody attempting to a McNaughton defense
in a criminal trial is if there's evidence
that they tried to cover their tracks afterward,
that they were aware that they had done something
which was unacceptable.
What you see with people who can't
tell the difference between right and wrong,
there is no evidence of them trying
to cover up their tracks.
Where do you see the McNaughton rule standardly applied?
Severe, severe schizophrenics.
And, for example, John Hinckley, the person
who tried to assassinate Reagan in the 1980s,
and he was found innocent-- or guilty
with an insanity defense, because he
failed a McNaughton ruling, severe schizophrenic.
So this has been the gold standard in most of the courts,
in most of the states, in this country.
The only way you could be held not accountable
for your criminal actions because of organic impairment
would be if you can't tell the difference
between right and wrong.
But then you've got a problem, because you get people
with frontal cortical damage.
And they can tell the difference between right and wrong.
They know the rules.
They can state them for you.
Yet, they can't control their behaviors.
And this comes through with all sorts of tests.
But you could show this now with people with frontal damage.
And, for example, here's the M&M test that you give them.
And what you've got is something desirable.
In this hand, you have five M&Ms. In this hand,
you have one.
And the rule is, if the person reaches for the five M&Ms,
you pull your hand away quickly.
And they get one M&M as a reward.
If they reach for the one M&M, you pull your hand away.
And you give them five M&Ms.
In other words, can they be disciplined enough
to not reach for the five M&M, and instead
hold out and go for one?
You get more of a reward that way.
By doing the harder thing, you will get more of a reward.
Extensive frontal damage, they never,
ever, ever are able to reach for the one M&M.
They always get pulled towards the easier solution--
the easier, more superficial way.
There's five M&Ms. That's what I want.
Instead of being able to do the executive stepping
back, and saying, if I go for a one right now, I will get five.
What is remarkable is you get an individual with frontal damage.
And they will tell you what the rule is.
They will sit there and say, I know.
I know what you're up to.
You want me to grab the five.
But then I'll only get one.
What I need to do is grab the-- and then they go for the five.
They can verbalize the rule right there.
They know the difference between right and wrong.
This is not organic impairment of knowing the rules.
This is organic impairment of being able to follow the rules.
And it is extraordinary what this one feature
of what the frontal cortex does, the difference between knowing
that there is a difference, and being able to
activate this pathway instead of that.
This is hugely, hugely challenging in the courts.
At the time that Hinckley attempted to kill Reagan,
every single state in the country
that had a McNaughton ruling in place-- yeah?
So for those people that just have the damage
and know the rules, would they cover up
the tracks in court case so they would be deemed not worthy
of the McNaughton rule?
OK, yeah, would fail the McNaughton ruling, absolutely,
because they know the difference between right and wrong.
So they would carry out the action,
then realize it was wrong, so try and hide it?
Yeah, exactly.
Or if they're disturbed enough-- OK, for our purposes,
yes, the person will know the difference
between right and wrong.
But they still cannot regulate their behavior.
And this is a huge problem.
What you wind up seeing is the McNaughton rule
has generally been accepted in most states in this country.
At the time that the Reagan assassination attempt was made,
federal criminal rulings had McNaughton ruling in it.
Almost all the states had McNaughton.
And something, about 10 or 11 of them,
also had organic impairment of volitional control recognizing
realms of frontal damage.
And what was very interesting was
in the aftermath of Hinckley being found criminally
insane instead of guilty, there were
these neanderthal bellowings all over the country, editorials
everywhere, about how Hinckley had gotten away with it.
Within a month, the federal government Congress
revoked the ability to have a McNaughton ruling
in any federal criminal trial.
The vast majority of states in this country,
their legislatures promptly leapt into action
to repeal McNaughton.
And along the way, I think in all but one or two states,
the volitional impairment rulings
went down the tubes also.
And at this point, the vast majority
of states in this country, you could have your frontal cortex
blown out of the water and you've got one half neuron
still functioning there.
And that is not relevant in a court of law--
an area that desperately, desperately needs some reform.
To give you a sense of how bizarre this could look,
this dissociation here between knowing
the difference between right and wrong
and being able to regulate your behavior,
this is what it would look like in terms of criminal behavior
with frontal cortical damage.
And, bizarrely, this was actually
a law case I was involved with some years ago,
where this was an individual who had just
been convicted of his eighth and ninth murders.
And this was a serial murderer.
And he was like a nightmare beyond imagination,
what this man was.
And this eighth and ninth one had just
been two boys he had abducted, kept captive for a week,
sexually raped, sexually mutilated, then strangled.
And this was number eight and nine.
And he had been brought out of a maximum security
prison in Florida, were we serving a whole bunch
of other life sentences.
And this was a case down in San Diego
that he was brought out for that one.
And the defense consisted of three minutes of the defense
attorneys getting up and saying, yes, he did it.
He absolutely did it.
This was the defense.
So this was now in the penalty phase deciding,
was this person going to get the death penalty?
Or was he going to get life in prison
without the chance for parole?
And the relevant thing about him was
when he was six years old he had had a massive car accident that
destroyed his frontal cortex.
He spent two months in a coma, no prior history
of anti-social behavior, no family history of any of it.
Came out of it extremely behaviorally disinhibited.
By age 11, he had assaulted his first individual, first murder
by age 13-- a completely broken machine.
Here's what behavior looks like in somebody
with no frontal cortex in this realm.
One of the things he also did, in addition
to his string of murders, were kidnapping, and rape,
and aggravated assault. And this was
one woman who had managed to, fortunately, survive this.
And she'd been abducted by him, where he took her
to his apartment and kept her there for a week,
repeatedly raping her, beating her senseless, days
and days of this going on.
And, eventually, whatever it is that shifted in him shifted.
He had, of course, her wallet in the process of kidnapping her,
and seeing her name, where she lived,
he finally says, OK, time to go, bundles her into his car,
and drive her home.
And as he lets her out, he says, I had a really good time.
I hope you did too.
Here's my phone number.
Maybe we can get together again sometime, and drives away.
And no surprise, he was arrested within an hour or so,
and eventually sort of pinned to a whole bunch
of these other ones.
This is what it looks like when you've got no frontal cortex.
What's interesting there is he's obviously made no attempt
to cover his tracks.
He was able to verbalize some of these rules,
and say it was inappropriate.
And he was able even to be told the specifics of his own case
with other names used, and be able to say,
whoa, that's not something you should do.
That against the law.
At these junctures, though, completely going off the rails.
He had an interesting combination, though,
which is that there were some elements
of the difference between right and wrong aspect of it.
The fact that he had his frontal cortex damage so early in life,
what you tend to see is around age 5 or 6 or younger,
the person tends to never quite incorporate the rules either.
It's not till you get-- say, adults
who get frontal damage that you get
the absolutely pure dissociation between this is not OK to do.
This is a wrong thing to do.
I am not going to do it.
And then goes and does it.
He, instead, had this much more mixed case there.
When you get the frontal damage around ages five,
or six, or younger, you get what is now
termed acquired sociopothy.
You don't do a great job of incorporating
the rules themselves.
And you certainly can't act on it.
So this is what it looks like with someone
who is that broken in this part of the brain.
Ironic ending, first jury was hungry.
We got one person to hold out for organic impairment
and give him life without parole.
So that was a mistrial.
And second jury went through the whole thing all over again.
And it took them three hours to give him the death penalty.
So what's very interesting there is,
like, 25% of men on death row have
a history of concussive trauma to their frontal cortex--
really, really interesting.
But now we begin to see some of those if-then clauses.
Here's another individual with a history of frontal damage.
And this is a relative of a close friend of mine.
And this was someone who when he was being born
there was a birth complication.
And they had to use calipers, and something slipped,
and caused frontal damage.
And frontally disinhibited.
This is an individual who is now an adult who is unconstrained
by the laws of society.
This is an individual who cannot regulate his behavior.
What does he do?
Whenever there's family get-togethers,
he plays the piano way longer than anybody else
wants to listen to.
He can't pick up the cues that everybody has had enough
and wants to go eat dinner.
Well, that was great.
I think the pot roast is getting a little cold by now.
Wasn't that great everyone?
Wasn't that-- and just keeps, oh my God.
He's out of control.
No less frontal damage than this guy did.
So here we have this puzzle.
We do not have the simple machine output there,
of, oh, massive frontal damage, this person
is a serial murderer.
Massive frontal damage, this person
plays Scott Joplin for hours and hours
until even his grandmother can't stay in the room anymore.
What's the difference?
I think we begin to see some of our if-then clauses
perhaps relevant.
The Scott Joplin playing one, upper middle class family,
tremendous family support.
This guy coming from a family anything
but that, we begin to see the, if you have no frontal cortex
but you have tremendous amounts of family support, lots
of opportunities, blah, blah, it is going to look different
than the massive case of it.
OK, so now looking at that, what we see
is there's just a couple of states
and the couple of juries in this country that
could deal with the implications of somebody
having 99% of their frontal cortex destroyed.
All you need to do to see the problem we're up against is,
what happens if you've got somebody
who's got 97% of their frontal cortex, destroyed or 94%,
or 85?
Or finally in our realm, where we all just have different
sized ones.
And the person next to you has 5% more synapses there,
or 3% fewer re-uptake pumps, or whatever.
That is beginning to get into a realm that is very challenging.
OK, so legal implications there-- enormous ones,
and ones where reform is desperately needed.
This reminds me.
Here is an example which strikes me
as historically quite amazing.
So we have this system saying, yes, it
is possible to be responsible for your criminal behavior.
But here's this one exception.
If you happen to have all of these neurons destroyed
and you're in Oregon, you can have this criminal defense.
And it's effective.
Oh yeah, there's this footnote.
Every now and then, something can happen so
that you get into a different category
than people who have done something awful because soul,
or evil, or whatever terms are coming in there.
Really interesting piece of history--
16th century, during the period where
if you had an epileptic seizure, you were virtually guaranteed
to be burned at the stake as a witch,
because there was a medical explanation
for epilepsy at the time, which was demonic possession.
And you were obviously a witch of some sort or other.
And, OK, so that was the medical knowledge of the time.
And if someone was accused of a witch in most
Western European countries where the Inquisition was occurring,
the rule of the law at the time was,
how do you confirm if somebody is a witch or not?
You read them the story of the crucifixion.
And if they don't cry, they are obviously a witch.
And that was the test.
That was the legal test.
If somebody was not moved to tears
by the story of Christ being crucified,
they were obviously a witch, and would very quickly
be burned at the stake.
At that point, one very, very progressive physician
who was up on the top of behavioral biology insights
at the time wrote a pamphlet saying, well, yes, of course,
we need to get rid of witches because they're bad news.
And of course we should burn them.
And this is very good test.
You have to remember, though, that every now
and then in some elderly women the lacrimal glands can
atrophy.
So they can't cry.
So this would be someone who is involuntarily unable to cry,
rather than they're a witch.
You just need to keep that in mind
when you do some of that witch sentencing stuff.
Sometimes it could be due to this organic impairment
business.
But the overall structure, yeah, let's get rid of those witches.
And that's a very good way of getting at it.
That makes no sense at all.
I suspect ultimately saying that in a small handful of places,
if you have no frontal cortex at all,
we're talking about neurology.
If you've got any frontal cortex,
we're talking about morality, and soul, and even all of that.
I suspect it will eventually make as little sense
as lacrimal glands drying up.
OK, I'm obviously just on the edge of tirading.
So let's take a five minute break.
And we will continue.
Frontal cortex [? of ?] [? viewers, ?] keeping track
of all those different rules, and keeping you from belching
loudly in the middle of a lecture,
and all those other frontal cortical sort of tasks.
What's the time of day when your frontal cortex is least active?
Any guesses?
OK, wait somebody say something clear.
Late at night.
Late at night, when late at night?
When you're sleeping.
When you're sleeping, when when you're sleeping?
REM sleep-- REM sleep, your frontal cortex
basically shuts down entirely.
That's why your dreams make no sense.
That's where your dreams you're doing
all sorts of things you would never want to do in real life.
The thing about the frontal cortex
is that it keeps you from doing and saying the sort of stuff
that all of us contemplate at various times,
but we would die if anybody knew we were thinking that.
You wipe out the frontal cortex, and you do it.
Or you take the frontal cortex offline
in the middle of dreaming.
And, suddenly, that seems like a wonderfully prudent thing
to be doing with yourself in the middle of a dream.
That's when the frontal cortex is least active.
OK, so now frontal cortex, looking
at one of its most distinctive, interesting things
about its function, its development.
When does it develop after birth?
And I think what I've already mentioned
is the frontal cortex is interesting
because it's the last part of your brain to fully develop.
It is the last part of your brain to fully form
all of the myelin on its axons.
It's the last part to get its full large complement
of synapses, and branching connections, and such.
It's the last part of the brain to develop.
When does the frontal cortex, on the average, completely mature,
go online for the first time?
Around age 25, which is astonishing,
which among other things should be reckoned
in the context that, probably, all sorts of you
guys still have a whole lot more myelin to lay down there
in the frontal cortex.
It is the last part of the brain to fully develop.
Some immediate implications of that-- if it
is the last part of the brain to develop, it is,
by definition, the part of the brain
least constrained by genes.
And it is the part of the brain most sculpted by environment
and experience, which is real interesting, given
that it is the most definedly human part of the brain.
So frontal cortical development in kids-- what we've already
heard is by age 5 or younger, get frontal damage,
and you get this acquired sociopathy.
You don't get as clear of a disassociation between you
know what the rules are, you simply can't carry them out.
It's more of a mixed bag at that point.
Frontal development after that-- the frontal cortex
works in a very interesting, perfectly logical way
in teenagers, as follows.
When you look at frontal activity,
and the extent to which it is being
driven by dopamine with one of these brain scanners,
take an adult, and take a teenager.
And they each have circumstances where they're doing some task
and they get a reward.
And some of the time, they get a smaller reward
than they think they deserve from the amount of effort
they put in.
And some of the time, they get an unexpectedly large reward.
Circumstance where the individual gets a bigger reward
than anticipated, dopamine goes up in adults
and drives frontal metabolism to a certain extent.
Dopamine goes up much higher in the teenager.
Now a circumstance where the task is being carried out.
And you don't get the reward.
Dopamine goes down in the adult, frontal metabolism
goes down a bit.
Dopamine goes down much more in the teenager.
The gyrations are much more extreme.
The dopamine-driven metabolic changes in the frontal cortex
are more dramatically large for reward,
are more dramatically having the floor fall out
under it for lack of reward, for disappointment.
It's a system that is simply less regulated.
And this, this fact that the frontal cortex is the last
maturing part of the brain, had to do with one of the wisest
things the Supreme Court has done in a long time,
which was about 10 years ago, when they made a ruling that
individuals who are under age 18,
when they carry out a capital crime,
you cannot have the death penalty applied to someone
for a crime they did between ages 16 and 18,
because explicitly stated in the court decision,
the brain and the regulatory areas of the brain are not
fully mature at that point-- the most neurologically informed
the Supreme Court has been in a long time.
Again, the McNaughton rule-- the McNaughton rule, which
is the backbone of the criminal defense and legal system
in this country, is based on 170-year-old neurobiology.
So this was a major leap forward in jurisprudence
meets neurobiology in this country with the Supreme Court
ruling.
Of course, what one might ask is,
so what exactly happens in the brain on the morning
of your 18th birthday that now makes
it OK to put you to death, where the science simply
doesn't back it?
But at least that recognition, the Supreme Court actually
dealing with the fact that a 17-year-old does not have
a normal frontal cortex yet.
What else goes on?
Thus, by the time you get a fully online frontal cortex,
around age 25 or so, one of the truly depressing things
out the other end of it is the frontal cortex
is the third most vulnerable brain region to normal aging--
bummer.
That is a drag.
What that winds up meaning is you have spectacular impulse
control for about three and a half weeks
on your 25th birthday.
And it's all downhill from there.
There's a motor system in the brain called the substantia
nigra which loses most of its neurons with aging.
That has something to do with the tremor of old age,
Parkinson's disease.
The hippocampus lose substantial percentage of its neurons
with age.
That has something to do with some of the memory problems.
Number three on the list is the frontal cortex.
Frontal cortex loses lots of neurons
over the course of aging.
And what you see, then, is all of those tests
of cognitive function, of frontal functioning,
they all have to be age-adjusted because people
as they get older have more trouble doing this, inhibiting
the over-learned response, preventing something
from intruding previously.
There's fewer of these projections coming in there.
And what does this begin to explain?
This is this whole world of grandmothers telling you
exactly how hideous they think your new hairdo is.
That's the world of disinhibited 80-year-olds speaking.
And what has always been the case in that literature,
it has always been interpreted in a social, psychological
maturation framework.
By the time you get to a certain age,
you finally accept, this is who I am.
I'm not in middle school anymore just trying to be popular.
If I need to march to a different drummer,
so be it, because I am at peace with who I am.
I accept myself.
It's not that.
It's the brain damage.
It's the brain damage that kicks in at that point, that being
a feature of normative aging.
Now, where else do you wind up seeing abnormalities
and frontal function?
Other individuals, individual differences--
one personality style where you see
elevated frontal metabolism.
And this is people with what's called
repressive personalities.
These are individuals who are highly regimented, highly
disciplined, highly capable of controlling their behavior.
These are individuals who do not express emotions very readily.
They're very bad at reading emotions in other people.
They're not depressed.
They're not anxious.
In order to be labeled with a repressive personality,
those are rule-outs.
You have an extremely structured life.
These are the people who can tell you
everything they're planning to do for the next three years.
And it's already scheduled out.
This is the roommate who always has all the work
done three weeks before the due date.
This is the person who makes you crazy
because you wish you could be half as disciplined
as they are.
People with personalities like this,
elevated resting metabolism in the frontal cortex.
So which sort of people have far lower than normal metabolism
in the frontal cortex?
Any guesses?
Shout out.
Thrill seekers.
Thrill seekers, yeah-- thrill seekers,
it seems to be more at the dopamine end of things.
And the zebra book considers that at one point in there.
When it's more manifest in, how are
you going to pull off stuff like this,
sociopaths have much lower than normal metabolic rates
in the frontal cortex.
In fact, in a couple of weeks there
is a guy coming to give a lecture--
and I'll announce in here when and where--
who is one of the people doing the most
interesting work with this.
What this guy has is a functional MRI machine
on a trailer, which he drives around
from one maximum security prison to another
throughout this country-- really interesting research
on violent individuals who are or aren't sociopathic,
decreased frontal metabolism.
But now something interesting.
You take a sociopath whose resting metabolic rate
in the frontal cortex is lower than normal.
Now you give them a task which demands a certain degree
of frontal function.
Not, oh, be a law abiding citizen in society,
but something like the tell the months of the year
backwards as fast as you can go.
And what you see is in order to generate
the same level of performance, they
have to activate more of the frontal cortex
than other people do.
In other words, under resting circumstances,
there is a hypometabolism in the frontal cortex.
And in the rare, relatively unemotional circumstances
where a sociopath does want to pull off a lot of regulation
of behavior, they've got to recruit a lot more
of the frontal cortex to do it.
It takes more work to do.
Other aspects of frontal cortex--
not only are kids not dealing with a whole lot
of frontal cortex.
Other species are not dealing with a whole lot
of frontal cortex.
Again, humans have more frontal cortex proportionately
than any other species.
There is no chimpanzee on Earth who
could master the five M&M, one M&M task.
And that is regularly used as a test for frontal function
on them.
Chimps cannot do it because it is simply too tempting to reach
for the five M&Md because it's right there.
Interesting assay of how many frontal neurons a chimp does
have, though, which is now instead of 5 M&Ms and 1 M&M,
five chips of wood and one chip of wood.
Reach for the five chips of wood, you get one M&M.
Reach for the one chip of wood, you get five M&Ms.
Every chimp can do it now.
They can all do it now because they're just looking
at these pieces of wood.
And they can remember, that's right.
Don't go for the five pieces of wood.
Go for the one piece of wood.
When it's chocolate, though, in front of them,
it's smells so great.
And how can you expect them to keep track of the rules?
And it's just the five.
And before you know it, they've done the wrong thing.
If you take away some of the viscera of it,
if you step back sensorially, if you substitute
this in your face chocolate for these little bits of wood,
chimps on the average have enough frontal function
to be able to pull that task off.
Kids, again, could never do this.
And this is one classic sort of developmental test.
You take a kid.
And they're in a room.
And you put a marshmallow there.
And you say, OK, does people know this one?
OK, so do people now know this one?
OK, so here's what you do.
You put the marshmallow there.
And you tell the child, OK, I've got to go out
of the room for a little bit.
You can have a marshmallow whenever you want.
But if you haven't had it by the time I come back,
you can have two marshmallows.
In other words, how many synapses
do you have in your frontal cortex?
Because that is spectacularly predictive
of frontal metabolism in these kids.
How long can they hold out doing the harder thing that
gets more of a reward?
What those studies also were showing
is the length of time a kid could hold out
on the marshmallow test when they're five years old
is predictive of SAT scores many years later,
is predictive of all sorts of aspects of the trajectory
of that frontal development.
Here's an even better assay for frontal function in a kid.
And this one, I think this is even more informative
than the marshmallow test.
Here's what you do.
You've got your five-year-old.
And you play hide and seek with them.
And the deal is you're the one who counts first
while they go and hide.
And what you do is you finish counting.
And then you loudly, excitedly say, here I come.
Here I come.
I'm going to get you.
Here I come.
Oh, where are you?
And then they instantly say, right here under the piano,
because they don't have enough frontal neurons to keep
themselves from saying that.
They can't stop themselves from saying, here I am.
Here I am, falling for that.
Now, they switch.
And it's their turn to count.
And they count.
You count up to 10.
And they go 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
because they're so excited to have discovered recently
there's all these numbers, that why not count all of them off?
And they've long forgotten you're supposed to stop at 10.
They can't inhibit that response.
This is what frontal function looks like in a kid--
so marshmallow tests and hide and seek tests.
How's this, though, for taking that charming world
of five-year-old regulation and putting it
into a much more depressing developmental context?
Studies by now showing at age 5, already kindergarten-aged kids,
there is a relationship between your socioeconomic status
and the thickness of your frontal cortex
and its resting metabolic rate.
What's the part of the brain that
has some of the highest levels of receptors
for glucocorticoids?
The frontal cortex.
What do glucocorticoids do to the frontal cortex?
They atrophy neurons there.
So what you are already seeing is,
get yourself an unfortunate, imprudent decision
in terms of which family you got yourself born into.
And be raised with the stress of poverty.
And by age 5, already there are socioeconomic differences
in the size and the activity of the frontal cortex.
And that is, I think, one of those factoids that
should have people rioting at the barricades in terms
of how screwed you are, how early on in life in the most
straight forwardly neurobiological way by some
of these oddities of experience and bad luck.
OK, so looking finally at the frontal cortex-- one thing
to ask at the end of the day is, so, frontal disinhibition?
Why don't you see with people with massive frontal damage,
instead of them becoming serial murderers,
why don't they become like serial people getting married?
Why aren't they serial standing on street corners giving away
their money and announcing their love to the whole world,
and doing equally disinhibited things in that realm?
It's not clear.
It's not clear why this is so much more tightly involved
in regulation of stuff going on in the amygdala.
OK, so as implied, though, by this arrow,
it is not one direction of inputs there.
It is bidirectional.
What you also see is a lot of ways in which the amygdala can
regulate the frontal cortex.
And what you already can guess is the projection
from the frontal cortex to the amygdala is inhibitory.
The projection from the amygdala to the frontal cortex
is inhibitory.
The frontal cortex is trying to get the amygdala
to restrain itself.
The amygdala is trying to get the frontal cortex
to stop sermonizing at it.
And what you wind up seeing is in rats, in primates,
and humans there is an inverse correlation
under resting conditions between the metabolic level
in the amygdala and the frontal cortex.
They move in opposition.
And what you see is, what are the circumstances where,
in effect, the amygdala is going crazy enough to be silencing
the frontal cortex?
That's the world in which you are
making astonishingly bad decisions about things
during moments of great duress and arousal
that you spend the rest of your life regretting.
That's the world of the amygdala getting very inaccurate, rapid
fire information, and being able to silence the frontal cortex.
And then out comes behavior that is really unregulated.
The frontal cortex and the amygdala, in a sense,
constantly wrestling in terms of their reciprocity.
So what happens when somebody has learned
to be afraid of something?
And slowly, over time, they learn that, in fact, this thing
is not fearful?
They habituate to this fear-conditioned response.
They habituate to yoking.
This buzzer means I'm going to get a shock.
They extinguish the behavior.
That's the term given for that.
You gradually see the amygdala activates less and less.
Oh, play the buzzer, play the tone,
that you've been conditioned to associate with a shock.
Amygdala goes crazy.
No shock this time, do the buzzer again,
no shock, not quite as active.
Next time, not quite as active, and it slowly habituates away.
Destroy the frontal cortex, and the amygdala
never habituates to a learned response,
a fear-conditioned response which is no longer fearful.
It can't learn to stop being afraid--
so another realm of this reciprocal inhibitory
relationship between the frontal cortex and the amygdala.
OK, final bit here in terms of their interactions--
the easiest way to frame it is, each inhibits the other.
They work reciprocally.
There are circumstances, though, where both the frontal cortex
and the amygdala will activate because all you have to think
are of some circumstances where whatever
your cultural conditioning is, doing the harder thing, which
is the right thing, is also the scarier thing.
Just think what it takes to have somebody blow a whistle.
And you leap up over the top of your trench in World War I.
And you're going to be dead 10 steps
into running towards the other trench line.
At some point, the frontal cortex
is, in fact, stimulating the amygdala very strongly
to produce its behaviors.
That's showing a circumstance where that is, indeed,
the harder behavior.
It is simplifying to say that they always work in opposition.
But as a general rule, that's happening.
OK, what this allows us do now is step back a bit
and now look at another brain region, one
which is in effect working in opposition
to the amygdala in another realm, which is the septum.
And you remember the septum.
The hippocampus sends its loop through the fornix
down to that septum thing.
In some manner, the septum inhibits aggression.
In the same way that, simplistically, the amygdala
mediates it, the exact same sort of evidence,
lesion studies, stimulation studies, recording studies.
For reasons I don't fully understand,
the septum has never been really a hot spot
for a lot of research.
Nonetheless, it, in some ways, works in opposition
to the amygdala.
You could now sit with one of those circuit
diagrams of the limbic system seeing who's connecting to who.
And you could see what sort of wiring
there must be for the septum to try
to silence the amygdala, what the circuitry there would be.
Back to that limbic rule, all these limbic structures
are trying to yell at the hypothalamus
and get it to listen to them and not to the other regions.
Another area implicated in aggression--
the lateral hypothalamus, subject
of a huge amount of research in the 1960s, people
interested in aggression.
And then people acted like ethologists
and learned the thing that we've already
talked about a bit in here, which is, oh, actually
the lateral hypothalamus has nothing to do with aggression.
It's got to do with predatory behavior.
When a rat leaps on a mouse and shreds it,
that's not an act of aggression.
That's an act of foraging.
Oh, lateral hypothalamus, food acquisition, not aggression.
Tons of research in the '60s went down the tubes
when people began to figure that out.
Now flipping to the other side of all of this stuff
rather than the aggression realm, the empathy realm,
the compassionate realm-- where are the structures coming in?
And we already know one area from the sex
lectures that is pertinent, which
is the anterior cingulate, sitting just
behind the frontal cortex.
And we already know about some of the things that it does.
Remember, that's the part of the brain,
somebody pokes your finger, it activates, along with your pain
receptor pathways.
You watch the finger of your loved on gets poked with a pin,
anterior cingulate activates as well.
That is the part of the brain where, literally and not just
metaphorically, you feel the pain of other individuals.
How is this?
Now, a study-- this was done recently by a guy at Harvard
named Josh Green.
What he does is he puts people in brain scanners, functional
MRIs.
And he gives them one of the great, horrifying moral
decisions that ever sort of actually
occurred in history, which was the old scenario that
and a bunch of people are hiding from the Nazis who are nearby.
And there is a baby with you.
And the baby who keeps crying.
And it is clear if the baby keeps
crying you are all going to be caught and killed.
Is it OK to smother the child?
And this wonderfully hypothetical,
let's write a doctoral thesis dissertation
on this problem here, was one which
was a human sort of decision that
had to be made endless number of times.
What would you do in that circumstance?
And what he shows in these studies
are that people who activate the anterior cingulate less
when they are contemplating this decision
are more likely to reach the decision that it
is OK to smother the child.
You see that in these studies, something about the feeling
the pain element, the empathizing,
something about that, when it is not as extreme,
that it is a predictor in these studies of the individuals
who will vote for the smothering.
All of this has given rise to this view
that a lot of what's happening between the cortex
and the limbic system is a whole lot more complicated
than this old dichotomy between thought and emotion.
And the cortex is about thought.
And the limbic system is about emotion.
What is clear is, instead, they are inseparable.
This whole notion brought up already,
that Guy Damasio, major figure in the field, this book of his
called Descartes' Error, where he
goes over Descartes' notion of the separability of thought
and emotion, and how in terms of brain function
that is not remotely the case.
In some realms, you can partially
separate frontal cortical function from limbic function.
One example of this-- and this was a classic study done
by that same guy, Josh Green.
And this was when he was still a graduate student.
It involved making use of people with a brain scanner
with what's apparently a classic test
in, or a classic puzzle in, philosophy--
the runaway trolley problem.
Here's the scenario.
There is a trolley which is somehow
broken loose from its brake.
It is rolling down the tracks, where
it is going to roll over there and kill five people.
First scenario, you have a choice.
You can pull a lever, which will cause the trolley
to be diverted onto a different track, where
it will kill one person.
Is it OK to pull the lever, saving these five people,
and one person getting killed?
Second scenario, you have the option--
you're standing behind this big beefy person.
And you can push him onto the track, where the trolley will
hit them and kill them.
But it will stop it from hitting the five people.
Are you willing to kill one person in order to save five?
And something that is shown in these studies over and over
is 75% of people are willing to pull the lever.
25% of people or so or willing with their own hands
to push somebody onto the track.
The math, the logic, is absolutely equal.
But this is always interpreted as how
we make different sorts of decisions
when it is a much more visceral, in your face,
you are going to have to push this person to his death
with your own hands, versus something
as impersonal as pulling a lever sitting
in a cockpit in a military base in Las Vegas,
and killing people on the other side of the globe.
How salient, in your face is it?
You get very different responses.
And what Green showed in his study was,
have people contemplating whether or not
to pull the lever, it's the cortex that's activating--
predominantly frontal cortex.
Have people decide whether or not to push with their hands,
it's predominately limbic activation.
Another version of this-- this has been researched
by a guy at Dartmouth named Oliver Goodenough-- again,
brain imaging.
And he is both a neurobiologist and also on the law
school faculty there.
And here's the sort of study he does.
You will see the equivalency of it.
Put people in a scanner.
And they've been going through a mock jury trial.
And what they now receive on the scanner
are the judge's orders to the jury
before they go and deliberate.
First version, the judge says, remember what you are here for.
You may have your feelings.
You may have your feelings about the person, and what they did,
or what they didn't do.
But at the end of the day, your job as a juror now deliberating
is simply to decide, was this law violated or not?
This is not for you to decide if it's a good law or not.
This is simply, was this law broken?
Second scenario, the judge stands there and says, OK,
as you go and deliberate, remember,
of course, what the law is.
But, remember, at the end of the day, what is this system about?
It is about protecting the weak from the powerful.
And you are a decision maker at this point-- two
totally different.
One is rule bound.
On is empathy bound.
People get the first sets of rules, cortex is activating.
Second set of rules, limbic system is activating.
So those are some domains where, in fact, they
are quite separable.
What you see, though, is that there
are all sorts of domains in which it is a completely
ridiculous dichotomy to make between, oh,
pure abstract cognitive decisions, and these messy,
yucky, emotive limbic sorts of ones--
instead, tremendous amounts of interactions between the two.
One domain where you see this, which
is what happens when you begin to damage
some of these structures?
You change the flavor of the decisions that are made.
Get people with frontal damage.
And give them the runaway trolley problem.
And they are far more likely to say, yes,
it is OK to push somebody onto the tracks.
They get a far more utilitarian decision.
Equally interesting, and the same sort of punch line,
studies where a technique that's now just being worked out
called transmagnetic stimulation,
were you can decrease the activity
of certain cortical regions for a couple of minutes at a time.
Turn off one sub region of the frontal cortex in people,
in volunteers.
And in various game theory games that they're doing,
they become a lot more utilitarian.
They become a lot more selfish.
So modulating interactions between there,
cross talk between the two.
In some ways the most interesting demonstration
for me of the ways in which these are not separable,
this thought from emotion stuff, is
this really interesting domain of how
the human brain does metaphor.
OK, so we get to symbols.
We get to abstract things.
We get into a world where we have a legal system
where not only can we judge that somebody has done something
wrong to somebody else, if they have murdered them, or stolen
their possessions.
But they can be viewed as having done something transgressive
if they've ruined the reputation of somebody else,
if they've stolen the ideas of somebody else, plagiarism.
This is a very abstract world of judgments we have.
These are very symbolic realms of decision
making we are often into.
Yet, we have this problem that we
have this very old evolutionary brain that did not necessarily
evolve for doing symbols and metaphors.
And one of the things you wind of seeing
is when the brain evolved the ability
to do some of this more metaphorical stuff,
it had to make use of the old circuitry that was there.
And, thus, what you wind up seeing
is very often when dealing with extremely abstract issues
of decision making, we treat some
of the metaphorical components as
if they were absolutely real.
What would be an example of this?
Here's one very cool study that was done recently.
So your body and your brain is very wired
up for doing temperature regulation.
Oh, this is hot.
This is cold.
These are different temperatures.
There's a whole metric, in temperature-sensitive
receptors.
And there's a whole circuitry thing.
And it's going about the very physical task
in the very real world of telling something
about temperature oscillation of ions, or whatever.
Get a hold of this study.
Somebody is coming up through what
they believe is some sort of psych testing
that they have volunteered for.
They get in the elevator to go up.
And the actual experiment has started in the elevator.
Somebody working on the experiment comes in.
And they're holding a whole bunch of books,
and barely holding on to them.
And they're having a cup of something.
And they ask the person, can you do me a favor?
I'm about to drop this.
Could you just hold this cup until we get up
to the fourth floor?
In one case, the cup is iced tea.
The cup is cold.
In the other case, the cup is warm tea, warm.
So the person spends about 15 seconds
holding either this cold cup or this hot cup.
And the person thanks them afterward.
And out they go.
And then they are asked to evaluate
the personality of the person they just interacted
with in the elevator.
And hold the warm cup, and you rate the person
as having a warmer, more expressive personality.
No, no, no, temperature we're talking about,
like how fast molecules are oscillating.
That's what temperature is.
Warmth, that's just a metaphor.
They get intermixed.
When brains had to invent dealing with things
like how warm of a personality somebody has,
or even something as nutty as how warm
is the color of the carpeting in this room,
where are you going to stuff it?
In some way, it is hijacking some
of the far more literal pathways of storage
of information in the brain.
Another example-- here is a wonderful one.
We already know that the same part of the brain, the anterior
cingulate that will tell you that your finger was
just poked, is telling you that somebody else's finger was
poked.
You are feeling their pain in the same part of the brain that
is doing pain in the literal sort of way,
another case of the brain kind of mixing metaphor
and symbol with the real thing.
Here's a particularly interesting version.
Go get yourself exposed to some totally rotting,
smelly carcass, or inadvertently take a bite
into some truly rotten food.
And you will have an area of the brain activate called
the insular cortex.
And what that does in every species looked at
is it processes foul, disgusting stimuli-- disgusting
spoiled food, or rotten, smell all of that.
That's what the insular cortex does.
And, no doubt, there's tongue receptors telling you
bacterial loads, or acidity of this rotten food,
or some such thing.
And that's what this part of the brain does.
Now, sit down a person.
And tell them a story of somebody being totally, totally
mistreated by somebody powerful, and some completely exploited
of horrible circumstance.
And the insular cortex will activate.
Have somebody play some game with somebody else,
one of the prisoner's dilemma type games,
where the person totally stabs him
in the back, the person they're playing against.
And gets away with it, and make a really exploitative,
rotten gesture.
And the insular cortex activates.
Sit somebody down and say in the control group,
tell me about some event that happened
when you were growing up.
Versus the experimental group, tell me about a time
when you were growing up that you did something really awful
to somebody else.
And the person describes that circumstance.
And the insular cortex activates.
What does this part of the brain do?
It's saying, oh, yes, this food is full of maggots
and does not taste very well.
But it also does moral disgust.
When you are feeling disgusted with how someone
has been treated, when how you have been treated it activates.
When you are having moral self-disgust
recounting something awful you did to somebody,
this part of the brain activates.
My God, don't they realize up there this is a metaphor?
You're not really eating rotten food.
And every language on Earth has words referring
to moral failures with words denoting
gustatory, repellent stimuli.
I am disgusted by what you did.
The fact that they did this, when I hear about what
they did, it makes me nauseous.
Something about this smells rotten.
Every culture has terms that intermixes
literal sensory disgust with moral disgust.
And what that's telling you is that when humans came up
with something as fancy as moral transgressions,
where are you going to stick the sense of outrage
you feel when there is a moral transgression?
I know.
Let's hijack the part of the brain that
tells you you're eating some rotten food,
shoehorning into there.
Now what you see is it is possible for us
to begin to confuse on which level those areas are working.
Another study, amazing one a couple of years
ago-- here's what was done in the study.
You take people.
And you put them through their paces
of either telling me something wonderful
you did when you were a kid, something
neutral, or some moral transgression you once had.
Tell me all about it.
And then afterward, saying, well,
thanks for participating in this.
And tell you what?
We can't pay you.
But we can either give you this pen set.
Or we can give you this nice flash drive.
Or we can give you this little soap set of scented soaps,
or whatever.
And have people talk about their moral failings,
and they're more likely to choose the soap afterward.
People want to wash their hands of their sins.
And starting with [? pilot ?] washing his hands of whatever,
this is in intermixing of metaphor with reality, showing
how clearly this was the case.
Now what they next did in the study was have people wallow
in recounting something awful they had done to somebody else.
And then they were allowed to go to the bathroom.
And I don't quite remember how they
did this, if they had cameras in the bathroom, which I kind
of suspect they didn't, or if they weighed the soap afterward
or something.
But people who had just gone through the moral transgression
recounting were much more likely to go in the bathroom
and washed their hands at that point.
But now what they had were people
who had done the moral transgression recounting.
Either they were given the opportunity
to wash their hands afterward of it.
Or they were not given the opportunity.
Now sitting in the test room, what happens
is the staged thing.
One of the people working on the project
comes in holding a whole bunch of books,
and accidentally drops them.
And a bunch of pencils scattered all over the floor.
If you were allowed to wash your hands of your metaphorical sins
in the previous few minutes, what they showed was
you were less likely to jump up and help the person.
People translating a sense of being
morally soiled into being an imperative of helping somebody
else.
Let somebody go wash their hands of recounting the awful thing
they did to somebody else, and they're
less likely to help people afterward.
What I think we're seeing here is
this amazing intertwining of doing some of our most
abstract judgments, and decision making, and decisions
about behaviors or not where we just got these old,
ancient, mammalian brains that those rotten food,
doesn't do rotten ethics.
You've got the systems confused.
What this begins to speak to is work by very prominent person
in the field, a guy University of Virginia Jonathan Haight,
whose work emphasizes just how much moral decision making is
not decision making, how much it is affective decisions,
showing first with brain imaging how often you are getting
the affective, the limbic, the disgusted cortical levels
of response before you have the decision making.
Argument being, there it is affect
driving the decision making, rather than the other way
around.
But what he also points out is the frequency
you give people scenarios-- and he's
doing really interesting work with this-- where
you give somebody a scenario where it just
strikes you as wrong.
Here are three of the ones that he
uses very often in the studies.
First one, you describe a pair of siblings.
They are grown up.
They are post-reproductive.
She has gone through menopause.
He's had a vasectomy, whatever.
And they are in love, and not in the platonic sibling way.
And they want to have a sexual incestuous relationship.
Is it OK for them to do it completely in private?
Second scenario-- your elderly grandmother
says it is absolutely fine with her to slap her in the face
right now.
Do you feel like it is OK to do?
Third scenario, one that he brings up
having to do with burning a flag and stomping on it,
something laden with symbolism, but at the end of the day
is nothing more than just some cloth.
Another one he brings up is, you're hungry.
Your pet has just died.
Why not cut him up and eat him?
And in all these cases, what you have is exactly the responses
all of you just had in there.
And these insular, cortical neurons
are popping out of people's ears all over this room.
And then what he does is say, well, what's wrong with that?
And people really have a hard time
giving a rational explanation, this whole framework
that he has developed, which most of the imaging research
agrees with, that people make their affective decisions long
before their more cognitive ones.
The cognitive ones are catching up afterward trying to figure
out, well, why is it so important that you cannot step
on some cloth that has this pattern on it?
But it's OK to step on the cloth with-- why
is that something worth putting people in jail for?
It just doesn't feel right.
And I think what that has much to do
with is how much of the coding of the abstract stuff
has to be stuffed into ancient brain pathways that's telling
you about very cold things, instead
of cold personalities, very disgusting foods
rather than disgusting moral acts.
We are dealing with a very ancient brain, and one that's
not very good yet at separating the limbic world
from a more cortical one.
OK, couple more pieces of this-- final piece
in terms of making sense of the neurobiology, which is now you
look at parts of the brain when somebody is
committing an aggressive act.
And you show neurons get activated there.
Well, that's kind of interesting,
all sorts of hypothalamus nuclei, mid-brain, brain stem,
those reptilian parts of the brain from the other day.
You see that happening.
You say, well, someone does something aggressive.
And they activate.
That seems to be interesting.
That seems to be pertinent.
And it winds up being not pertinent in the slightest,
because what you see is those are the same neurons that
would activate if you are running for your life.
Those are the same neurons that would
activate if you were running joyfully to meet someone.
Those are neurons that are just doing
the nuts and bolts sympathetic nervous system stuff.
If you were running for your life,
or if you were running towards someone
you love, and those are totally different emotional states,
nonetheless your heart has to be beating faster.
And your diaphragm has to be doing something different.
These are nonspecific pathways of activation
in the sympathetic nervous system.
As has been stated, if you are recording from some of these
sympathetic nuclei in the mid-brain,
if you were recording from them, you cannot tell the difference
whether a person has just murdered someone or just had
an orgasm.
In both of those cases, neurons have
to be doing very similar things.
There's a whole realm of non-specificity to arousal.
And this brings up a really important quote,
and one that I think will run through all of these aggression
sections here, a quote from Elie Wiesel,
concentration camp survivor, Nobel Laureate for his writing,
Elie Wiesel, extraordinary man, who
has this famous quote, which goes as follows.
The opposite of love is not hate.
The opposite of love is indifference.
And the way that he uses it is in sort
of a historical framework.
The opposite of love is not hate.
The greatest harm you can do to someone
who has been a victim of something
is to be indifferent to their history,
to deny that it has happened, to see it not be an imperative
to make sure it never happens to anyone else again,
et cetera, et cetera.
The opposite of hate is indifference.
Applied to physiology here, it is absolutely the case.
When you look at what the sympathetic nervous system is
doing, when you look at some of the stress hormones,
love and hate are not opposites in the slightest.
They are physiologically very, very similar.
What I think that also tells you is
how readily some humans psychopathologically
can confuse the two states.
When you look at some of these brain
stem hindbrain spinal areas during these acts,
love and hate are not opposites.
They are very related to each other.
OK, jumping forward in the last couple of minutes, what we now
have is looking at what hormones are doing
to this-- hormones in terms of the short-term hormonal
environment, not early in life, the short-term hormonal
environment.
And what we have to deal with, of course, instantly
if we're going to bring up hormones is,
so what's the deal with testosterone?
What does testosterone have to do with aggression?
Why is it that in virtually every species out there,
males are more aggressive than females, males have more
testosterone than females do?
All you need to do to make sense of this whole section
here is take everything from last week concerning
testosterone and sexual behavior and just
substitute aggressive behavior for sexual behavior.
It's the same exact rules.
Yes, testosterone is required for the full expression
of aggressive behavior in males of most species.
How do you tell?
Subtract it out, the castration stuff.
After castration, do levels of aggression go down to zero?
No, same thing as last week, the more prior
experience one has being aggressive,
the less of a drop in aggression there
is after testosterone levels are removed.
Put back 100% the normal levels, aggression is reinstated.
Put back 10% the normal levels, reinstated to the same extent,
200%, same extent, same exact rule-- testosterone
is needed for the normal expression of behavior.
But it is not necessary or sufficient.
And your brain, your limbic system,
can't tell the difference between
moderate, medium, and very high levels of testosterone.
There is no way you could look at an individual's
testosterone levels, and because it's
two units higher than it was last week,
or higher than the person sitting next to them, to make
any sort of prediction about who is going to be more aggressive.
When you see a correlation between the levels
of aggression and levels of testosterone,
it's the behavior driving the testosterone, not the other way
around.
How does this translate into physiology?
Here's one example of this in terms of studies.
Take five rhesus monkey males-- and this was
a classic study that was done.
Put them together, and they form a dominance hierarchy.
Number run beats two through five,
number two beats three through five, so on.
Take number three and pump him up with testosterone.
Pump him up with insane amounts of testosterone.
And what you will see is he will now be involved in more fights.
Does that mean that number three is now threatening
number two and number one?
Absolutely not, what's going on, number three
is being a nightmare to numbers four and five.
Is testosterone changing the structure
of aggression in this group?
No, it's exaggerating the pre-existing social structure.
What testosterone does is modulate.
It amplifies.
It does not turn on a radio of aggressive music.
It increases the volume if and only
if it is already turned on.
What does this look like in terms of the biology,
getting down to the neurobiology level?
That whole business, raise testosterone levels,
and the amygdala gets a lower threshold
for deciding that a face looks threatening.
Put somebody in a brain scanner, and flashing up
subliminal faces, and it takes less of a scary face, one that
would be border line higher testosterone levels in someone,
amygdala activates more.
How would this look like on a cellular level?
Back, remember, with that business
about action potentials, the neuron has an action potential.
And then for a while afterward, it enters a refractory period.
It is silent for a while afterward.
What does testosterone do on the level of single neurons
in the amygdala?
It shortens the refractory period.
It makes it possible for the neurons
to fire more times per unit time,
thus asking the question, what does
testosterone do to electrical activity
in neurons and the amygdala?
It does nothing.
If and only if the neurons are already excited,
testosterone will increase the numbers of them.
Testosterone does not cause.
It amplifies.
And what it mostly amplifies is preexisting social structures.
OK, you noticed there that I was also
being very careful in saying on the average,
males are more aggressive than females in all sorts of species
out there.
On the average, males have higher testosterone levels
than females do.
The one great exception to this, which is briefly
touched on in the zebra book, which
is one of the great topics in all of endocrinology
these days, is spotted hyenas.
Hyenas are weird animals.
Hyenas have a totally different worldview thanks
to a bizarre neurobiology.
Among spotted hyenas, females are dominant to males.
Females are bigger than males.
Females are more muscular than males.
Females are more aggressive than males.
Females have higher testosterone levels than males do.
And you look at the private parts of a hyena,
and you cannot tell who is which sex.
Female hyenas have androgenization.
They have enlarged clitoris's the size of penises in males.
They have something that looks like a scrotum, which turns out
to be compacted fat cells that form these scrotum-like things.
And they look just like the males.
And over the years as part of my field work,
I spent some years sharing camp with a guy who is without
question the world's expert on, like, hyena clitoris's.
And this guy would bring in some anesthetized hyena.
And he would have to look at this thing for 15
minutes with like calipers, and like night
viewing goggles and stuff to finally decide its gender.
Hyenas are this very interesting case of a sex reversal
androgenization.
Females producing very high levels
of androgens in their ovaries.
And you've got this sex reversal system
with the following thing, unlike in most species of carnivores.
What happens in the lions, for example,
males eat first, followed by females, followed by cubs.
Most lion cubs starve to death in the first year of life.
Among hyenas because of the sex reversal system,
cubs eat first, followed by females, followed by males.
The kids survive that way, a wonderful mutation
in terms of doing that.
And what you get as a result is, unavoidably, you
get a masculinization of the genitalia in the females.
And what you wind up doing is it winds up having
a different signaling purpose.
In most species, what happens among male primates,
for example when males are trying
to display their dominance, they get an erection
and wave their penis, and look how tough and scary I am.
And that's due to a certain wiring
of the autonomic nervous system.
In hyenas, it works just the opposite.
Males get erections when they're terrified,
because you think about it.
Males are lower ranking than females.
Females spend all their time ripping off the males
who have just hunted something.
Females terrorize the males.
So you're some male sitting there.
And here comes this terrifying female.
What do you do?
You say, don't hurt me.
I'm one of these males.
I'm not threatening, or whatever.
In males, what you get is you get erections
when you are under stress as a subordination gesture.
What do females do?
Low ranking females get clitoral erections
when they are being threatened by high ranking females,
a total sex reversal system.
So hyenas can either wind up telling you,
we are breaking out of these stereotypical role
gender expectations, in that you can have a species where
females are dominant, and more muscular, and more aggressive.
But at the end of the day, they are like that
because they are even more hormonally like males
than males are.
Final amazing thing about them-- and this
is a story of this friend of mine,
this guy who's been studying hyenas for 30 years.
And he's incredibly knowledgeable about hyenas.
And this was something that really
makes you stunned at what sort of people
there are in the government thinking about things here.
So one day-- he's from Berkeley.
One day, he's in his office there.
And he gets a call.
And it's from some army colonel.
And the army colonel says, oh, we're having a conference.
And we're having a whole bunch of carnivore biologists coming
to it.
We're going to have a great time.
We're having this conference of carnivore biologists.
And we want you to come to it.
My friend says, um, you're from the army?
What are you talking about?
Do you know what I study?
And the guy proceeds to show him that he knows exactly what he
studies, and what his social security number is,
and how many, like, cavities he has, and how much unpaid taxes.
And he says, so all of America's carnivore biologists
are coming to this meeting.
So come to this meeting.
We're going to have a great time.
It's going to be at this hotel in Arizona.
Come, you're going to have a terrific guy.
So my friend decides, why not?
And goes to this, and winds up in this place.
And here's this conference with all
of America's carnivore biologists,
and these three army colonels sitting
in the back with these sunglasses on.
So all the carnivore biologists are fairly confused about
what's up here.
But, nonetheless, they sort of settle down.
And they start doing their scientist thing,
giving talks to each other.
And the Army guys are sitting in the back there.
And there's two days worth of them just sitting
in the back saying nothing.
And, finally, all the carnival biologists
get all upset, and say, what are you guys doing here?
What are we doing at a conference
paid for by the US Military?
And they finally say, OK, OK, you're such great guys.
We're going to tell you actually what we're really up to here.
You know, we're from the military.
We're actually from the tank corps.
And what we have is we're designing these new walker
things.
Do you remember in the Star Wars movie, in the second one,
they had those machines that looked like the elephants that
could walk and all of that?
Well, we want to build them.
In order to build them, we have to know
how animals locomote, locomate, how they move, how they walk.
And you guys study carnivores.
And carnivores run around a lot.
So we want to hear you guys.
Tell us how your animals move when they're
doing things like hunting.
And America's carnivore biologists listen to this,
and say, this makes no sense at all.
You want to learn about locomotion in animals.
You get bioengineering people.
You don't get zoologists.
What's going on here?
So all of America's carnivore biologists
proceed to go and sort of huddle there, and decide
they're going on strike.
They are not going to give any more talks
until people explain what's up.
They eat all the donuts that are left, go to the bar,
start drinking.
And they're going to refuse to have anything
to do until these colonels explain
what's actually going on.
So the colonels, obviously, need to get on the phone
to Washington, and call up, and get permission.
They come back and say, OK, OK, because you guys are all
our best friends, we're going to tell you what's really going.
We're really not making Star Wars walkers.
Here's what we're really doing.
We're from the tank corps.
And we've built this new tank recently
and it was what was called the Sherman tank.
And apparently for all of history,
what you do if you're in the tank corps, is what you do
is you just bash the hell out of everything,
and drive your tank to the highest spot
around, and just shoot anything that moves.
But the Sherman tank apparently was like the greatest tank
that had ever been built.
It could drive like 60 miles an hour.
And it could fire missiles when it was bouncing upside down
out of ditches, and gyroscopic this and that.
And it was the greatest, most mobile tank.
And they were having a problem, which
was they would put in their tank corps in there.
And what they would do was bash the hell out of everything,
and drive to the highest spot around, and just shoot
anything that moved.
So the US Army Corps decided that they
needed to teach their troops, their army, their tank corps,
how to hunt like carnivores.
And, thus, here they invited all of America's
carnivore biologists to come in and teach us
how to teach our tank crews how to hunt like carnivores.
How do you figure out who's going
to cut corners on the prey?
How do you communicate if you're out of sight with each other?
What do your hyenas do?
What do your wolves do?
What do your coyotes do?
So at that point, like, all of America's carnivore biologists
say, whoa, we are way in over our heads here.
So a third of them instantly march out
shouting about Ho Chi Minh or whatever, given
the age group of most of America's carnivore biologists.
And the rest of them huddle there.
And they come back.
And they say, well, these are very
difficult questions to answer.
So the military guys say, well, yes we will give you
money for your research.
So at that point, all of America's carnivore biologists
decide they're now best friends with these Army Corps guys.
They go through the rest of the conference telling them
all about the hunting techniques of their animals,
and with careful instructions as to who to submit grants to.
They all immediately go back to the universities, write grants.
My friend writes this grant for like four Sherman tanks,
and night viewing goggles for like a Death Star
and flamethrowers for his hyenas, and all of that.
All of America's carnivore biologists
send in their grant proposals to this PO Box at the Pentagon.
And nobody has ever heard from any of these Army guys again.
And this was about 15 years ago.
And to this day, none of them know
what were these people really trying to find out
from us at this meeting?
This was this totally bizarre incident
showing that somebody or other in the tank corps
is sitting around trying to figure out
what it is that the coyotes, and marmots, and hyenas do.
 So back a little bit.
Still back in the neurobiology.
Back to the anterior cingulate.
Remember anterior cingulate again.
All that empathy stuff, feeling somebody else's pain.
That business about something metaphorical,
something symbolic about pain and empathy
is happening in there.
Something people have been speculating
about for about 10 years now has to do
with a class of neurons that have come
to be called mirror neurons.
Mirror neurons were first identified
in motor parts of the cortex, parts that
tell you which muscles to move.
And these are neurons that don't get excited
when you are, for example, moving your arm like this.
And they don't get excited if you're watching somebody
moving their arm like this.
But they do get excited if both of you
are doing it at the same time or closely in time with each other
if they're mirroring each other.
So people took a look at this and this
immediately became an area of a lot of research.
And from the first nanosecond when people were discussing
mirror neurons, of course what they were immediately
talking about is this is some neuronal cellular basis
of empathy, feeling somebody else's pain.
That sort of thing.
There's got to be mirror neurons in the anterior cingulate
that's doing more abstract versions of feeling somebody
else's actions and feeling somebody else's feelings
and all that sort of thing.
Totally irresistible.
There has not been a paper written
on the neurobiology of empathy in the last decade
without the word mirror getting some place or other in there.
Totally cool idea.
Still not yet demonstrated.
Shifting over, covering a little more ground.
That business again about sort of storage
of very abstract new stuff, symbolic stuff,
into our clanky old mammalian brains.
The notion of having to mix in symbolic metaphorical functions
into areas of the brain that do it very literally.
What comes through with that is strong support
for the argument of someone like Haidt, that guy the other day,
arguing that moral reasoning is mostly after the fact.
It's rationalization for moral affect.
Mostly what we're having is an initial moral affective
responses.
And that's built around the power of, for example,
a symbolic moral failure to cause the same neurons to get
excited in your brain that would tell you that you're disgusted
with rotten food, the visceralness, the sort
of salience of it, the whole notion
there being in his work more and more support
for it that an awful lot of the time moral reasoning
is coming after the moral decision has been made
along the lines of affect.
And a lot of the brain imaging work by now
is showing evidence for this.
And again, the strongest sort of evidence
is when you go through the list of things,
would you eat your pet after it died?
Is incest OK if it's post-reproductive?
And all the ways in which people say, I can't tell you why,
but it's wrong.
That shouldn't be allowed.
And what that is over and over in those cases
is a demonstration of the affective moral decision making
coming before the moral reasoning.
So really important feature of his work.
Backfilling on some neurotransmitter stuff,
neurochemistry.
I managed to completely forget poor, innocent serotonin coming
into the picture.
What we covered on Wednesday was dopamine
and the ability of dopamine to, in effect,
give the frontal cortex the energy
to do the emotional regulation stuff.
In effect, if what the frontal cortex
is saying to all of the limbic system
on many occasions is, don't do, it don't do it,
I wouldn't do that if I were you.
What the dopaminergic projections
into the frontal cortex are doing
is telling the frontal cortex, tell the limbic system not
to do it because it's going to be amazing if they can hold out
down there.
The dopamine system, in terms of the anticipation of reward.
Now switching over to another neurotransmitter
that gets lots of attention in this business-- serotonin.
Before it's over with, we are going
to hear about serotonin in coming weeks having
to do with a bunch of different psychiatric disorders.
But this is serotonin in some frontal cortical related areas
of the brain seeming to have something
to do with aggression and impulsive behavior.
What's the evidence?
First off, the totally correlative stuff.
Look at levels of serotonin in animals, experimental animals,
in these projection areas that go into the frontal cortex.
Lower levels of serotonin predicting more impulsive,
more aggressive behavior.
Consistent finding in the field.
Consistent finding when you then switch over to humans and look
at something that you cannot do in a human,
not looking at something that you can't do in a human--
whatever.
You can't look at serotonin levels and somebody's brain
because you're not going to slice it out and measure stuff.
What that whole literature is about
is instead looking at this synthetic pathway.
How is serotonin broken down, these two enzymes here.
MOA, monoamine oxidase, this one broken down
into a waste product called 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid.
Do not write that down.
5-HIAA.
The main point being that in a human
you can't measure levels of this very readily.
You measure this in the blood stream,
in the cerebral spinal fluid, in the urine, places like that.
And the literature is showing that lower levels
of serotonin breakdown products are correlated
in humans with higher levels of aggression and antisocial
behavior.
You should be able to rip that one to shreds within seconds.
Number one, this is just correlative
and you could very easily imagine horses and carts
getting all confused here.
The second thing is remember when
you're measuring neurotransmitter junk
in the bloodstream or the urine, you're
measuring the junk of all the gazillion different places
in the brain where this neurotransmitter
is being used for things have nothing to do with aspects
of aggression, impulsivity.
It's really hard to tell anything.
Nonetheless, the animal literature
has been pretty consistent with this.
So back to correlation.
Which is causing which, which is causing which?
Then you could do the animal studies
showing that when you manipulate serotonin levels in something
like a rat or a primate, drive down
serotonin levels in the frontal cortical region
and you get more aggressive behavior.
You get more impulsivity.
So evidence for that there actually being causal.
Something similar or a building block
of that, studies that have been done in humans.
You don't slice somebody's head open
and measure their serotonin levels,
but instead in this case you give
a drug which, for a short period, will mimic serotonin.
and It will mimic serotonin in the way serotonin
interacts with the receptors in the frontal cortex,
your buzzing serotonin pathways.
In those individuals in the frontal cortex what do
you wind up seeing?
Increased metabolism in the frontal cortex.
Serotonin stimulates frontal metabolism
except in individuals with a history of antisocial violence.
What's that beginning to suggest?
Part of what serotonin is doing is joining in with dopamine
to stimulate the frontal cortex, get
the I wouldn't do that if I were you really, really, hold on
don't do it, pathways down to the limbic system.
And part of the evidence we're seeing,
violent sociopaths having lower than normal metabolic rates
in the frontal cortex.
Some of these pieces beginning to come together.
So a lot is relevant in terms of levels of this.
Immediately one starts thinking genes.
Genes related to the various types of serotonin receptors.
Genes related to the enzymes that make
serotonin, that break it down.
And there's a literature that's emerging on that one.
First off, it is a really tough literature to make sense of.
As follows, suppose you are studying
some population of people who are very aggressive
and you're measuring this breakdown
product in their bloodstream and you see there's
very low levels in the stuff.
OK.
So how do you interpret that if?
You believe that low levels of serotonin
give rise to aggression.
So what's your interpretation?
Low levels of this, because you're not
making much serotonin.
If you're not making much serotonin,
you're not getting much serotonin breakdown product,
support for the idea that aggression is
caused by too little serotonin.
Suppose instead you like the idea of too much serotonin
causing aggression.
What would you then say?
Well, suppose there is a mutation in one
of these enzymes that's supposed to break down serotonin.
And because of the mutation, it doesn't.
What's going to happen?
Serotonin doesn't get broken down, it's levels build up,
and thus you'll see low levels of that.
In other words, the same exact finding
can tell either elevated or lower than normal levels.
Completely uninterpretable when you're
trying to make sense of what's happening
in an organism like a human where you can't actually
measure at this step.
So there could be low levels because there
is low levels of everything.
Or there could be low levels because,
thanks to a blockade here, the levels of this are building up.
Totally impossible to separate those out.
In some of the studies in the field
have really strongly voted for one type of conclusion
based on human studies measuring that stuff
where it simply can't be done.
How about the genetics, though?
What you see are differences in variance of the gene.
That's the critical one for making serotonin.
Basically concept, if you're not a bio chem type,
if there is a couple of steps needed to make something
and one step is really, really important,
basically like if this first step
occurs you're guaranteed that the second one will.
And the first step is the one that's a little bit iffy.
That would be referred to as the rate limiting
step in the pathway.
The rate limiting enzyme, this enzyme tryptophan hydroxylase,
is the rate limiting step in the synthesis of serotonin.
And by now, there is a literature showing variance
on tryptophan hydroxylase in people.
Variance in non-human primates that
begin to correlate a bit with how much of this,
how much of aggression.
Not big effects.
Back to our statistics lecture, the findings are there.
They're not big effects, though.
Meanwhile, at the other end, people
have been looking at genetic variants on these guys
and that literature is coming through also.
Different variants that appear to have
different levels of activity correlated
with different levels of aggression, different levels
of breakdown products.
So that's out there as well.
But immediately we've got something going straight back
to four different earlier lectures, the point being made
over and over, scale graph by now where exactly where
this one is heading-- if I can get the right ink--
which is-- OK.
So variants on this MAO gene, this monoamine oxidase.
It comes in two different flavors.
And what you've got is in terms of how they function.
One of them should be predisposing
towards more serotonin signaling than the other.
And thus you would predict that the one that predisposes you
towards less serotonin signaling in the frontal cortex
should be associated with higher levels of aggression.
And thus we go back to that same exact study, that same group
that did the study looking at the interaction
between depression, serotonin transporter gene, all of that,
looking at those data.
Now what they were asking was by age 25 or so
what was the incidence of antisocial violent behavior
in this population of 17,000 kids
and what does that have to do with which variant of MAO
they had?
And it's the exact same punchline by now.
This is the depression gene environment, stress,
figurative, superimposable with this.
It's the exact same punchline.
Having the bad version of monoamine oxidase gene
does not increase your risk of antisocial violent behavior.
Having the bad version of the gene
and getting brought up in an environment with abuse vastly
increased likelihood.
And what they showed in there was the number of times
of major physical abuse during childhood,
the more that was the case, the more
there was an interaction here.
Having the good version growing up
in a more abusive setting, yes, it
increases the odds of antisocial behavior.
Not a big effect, though.
What do we got here?
Yet another gene environment interaction.
By now you should be utterly unwilling to say
whether any gene does anything here
outside the context of saying, in what sort of setting,
with what sort of background?
Huge interaction here.
So giving a sense here of where serotonin is fitting into it.
Next piece of neurochemistry that's relevany-- and this
is not a neurotransmitter, but this
is a nuerochemical that occasionally
gets put into the nervous system, which is alcohol.
Alcohol.
What doe alcohol do first to neurons on sort
of the nuts and bolts level?
Is alcohol a mimicker of any particular neurotransmitter?
No.
Does alcohol bind to any particular class
of neurotransmitter receptor?
No, not that either.
Alcohol seems to have some remarkably nonspecific effects
in terms of how cells function.
All one could say at this point is alcohol
is not equal to-- it's kind of working
like this neurotransmitter or that enzyme
or that-- it's not that clean.
It is a messy drug with lots of effects in the brain.
So what does alcohol have to do with aggression?
Everybody knows the answer to that,
which is alcohol increases levels of aggression.
Everybody knows this.
Everybody knows this and the guy who
gets a couple of drinks under his built
and is flinging people out the bar soon afterward.
Alcohol increases aggression.
What you find, in fact, is there is no significant relationship
between the two.
A huge literature examining this by now.
And what you see instead is one of our if then contingent
themes here.
Over and over you're getting this sort of thing coming up.
Alcohol does not cause people to be aggressive.
Alcohol causes people who already
are aggressive to become more aggressive.
Alcohol causes people who are unaggressive to become
more inhibited.
What alcohol does is merely magnify
the preexisting social tendencies.
This theme over and over again.
That's exactly what testosterone was doing two days ago.
Testosterone does not make number three ranking rhesus
monkeys start attacking number two and number one.
It makes them absolutely torture numbers four and five.
Testosterone does not create aggression.
It amplifies preexisting social patterns [INAUDIBLE] that's
our remove the testosterone and aggression doesn't go down
to 0%.
Interaction with social history, same exact theme again.
Alcohol does not cause aggression.
It amplifies aggressiveness in people
who already are aggressive.
Along with that, sort of as a confounding factor,
we have this problem that everybody knows that alcohol
makes you more aggressive.
And what has also been shown in studies
is that if you tell people that you have just
raised their blood alcohol levels
infusing in either alcohol or infusing in saline.
And what you see is when people believe
their blood alcohol levels have risen
they become more aggressive.
What is alcohol about?
Alcohol allows you to give voice to those preexisting
social tendencies towards aggression.
Modifier over and over again this sort of theme.
And this has been studied in all sorts of contexts.
One really interesting domain have
been people who-- anthropologists
who basically study how people in different cultures
learn to get drunk.
That's kind of interesting.
That must be an interesting thing to spend your career on.
What is this about?
Looking at-- one of the people who does this work,
looking at this whole issue of populations that did not
have a prior history of heavy alcohol
use before some explicit transitional event.
And what that usually translates that into
is Polynesian islands that did not
have much alcohol before they were touched by the West
during World War II with alcohol brought in heavily after that.
So the question becomes, what are people's behaviors
like in these cultures as they are first
having a culture of people drinking to excess?
And the answer is, it depends.
It depends on the people who are teaching you to drink.
And what you see is an interaction
between the type of colonial power
that controlled the island at the time and what people did.
And you would see in British controlled islands,
American controlled islands, people
would start realizing that you're
supposed to be aggressive and become more violent when you're
drunk.
Meanwhile, over in like French Tahiti, people get drunk
and they all sleep with each other.
Aha.
[LAUGHTER]
It's a cultural context specific sort of thing.
This shown over and over again.
So a little bit on the neurochemistry here.
We then began working our way left,
looking first at hormonal regulation,
the short-term hormonal effects.
Looking at testosterone.
Let's also briefly go to the other side
around that time point, the acute environmental releasers.
Aggression as our fixed action pattern.
What are some of the releasing stimuli for aggression?
Some of the most reliable ones are ones that always, always
demand you to interview an animal in the same language
across different species Just as with sexual behavior releasing
stimuli, some species become aggressive in response
to smells, to sounds, to sights, to our whole array with this.
Here's one version.
Here's a species of ant that gets aggressive in response
to vibration.
And these are ants living in East Africa
that have a symbiotic relationship with trees there
acacia trees.
And what happens is the acacia trees grow these little sort
of igloo bubbly spheroid things on their branches, which
have holes in them and which provide perfect living
environments for the ants.
So acacia trees are giving ants a home.
And what the ants do in return is they protect the acacia tree
from herbivores.
Herbivores eating their leaves.
What happens?
Along comes a giraffe and begins to chew
and it breaks a branch and the vibration
causes all of these ants to come pouring out
and bite the giraffe's lips.
At which point the giraffe goes to a different tree.
So we see in that case, what's the releasing stimulus?
Go and shake a branch and you suddenly
have 4,000 ants angry at you.
All these deals again and again, interviewing an animal
in its own language.
So what are some of the reliable releasing stimuli in humans?
Same theme as with the sexual behavior.
We don't have any auditory stimuli that automatically
trigger aggression.
We don't have any olfactory ones.
We don't have any-- we've got some subliminal ones.
Remember that study mentioned a few weeks back.
Take sweat from someone who is frightened
as opposed to the same amount of sweat
from someone who's been happily exercising.
That was the deal of swabbing the arm pits of people
jumping out of airplanes.
Take sweat from someone who is frightened
and subliminal exposure to it, the amygdala activates.
So we're not completely free of sensory stuff,
but we're not triggered in any sort of way that's as
dramatic as in other species.
So what sort of multi-sensory, multi-modal sort of things
trigger aggression?
Number one, most reliable one, is pain.
Make an organism feel pained and you have greatly
increased its likelihood of turning around and biting
the closest thing to it.
So pain as a trigger for it.
Frustration as a trigger.
Take a rat.
Train it to press a lever 10 times, it gets its food.
10 times, get its food.
10 times, it doesn't get its food.
10 times, you're not giving it its food.
Get the rat good and frustrated.
And with great reliability if there
is another rat sitting there, it's
going to spin around and bite it.
So displacement aggression, being driven there
by frustration, by pain, things of that sort.
And what's really depressing is if you were a rat or a primate
and you were sitting there being frustrated by not getting
a reward and your glucocorticoid levels
have risen, go and bite somebody else
and your glucocorticoid levels will go down.
And there we describe a very depressing feature
about our social world.
Displacing aggression on somebody else
in species after species is stress reducing.
So triggers.
Triggers for that.
Great example of this and a remarkable one,
back to that business from a couple of weeks
ago, that alternative mating strategy of orangutan males.
That business that after hearing all
that heartwarming alternative strategy stuff of male
baboons forming friendships with females.
Meanwhile, the alternative strategy with a orangutan
males being something that absolutely fits
all the definitions of rape.
Well, do you see anything like that
in some other primate species?
And you see it every now and then among male baboons.
Again, defined as forced sex with a female
who actively attempts to get away
and actively attempts to resist.
What you see under that sort of definition
is every now and then it will happen in baboons.
What is the circumstance?
I've seen it three times over the years.
Other people have seen it occasionally as well.
It's always the exact same circumstance.
It is the number one male on the day or the day
after that he has just been dumped out
of his alpha position.
And most of the time the animal goes and mopes somewhere else.
Most of the time the animal mopes and then
finds somebody smaller to beat up on.
The only times I've seen this over all these years, that
was exactly the circumstance.
Frustration, aggression displacement.
Very, very familiar.
When we get to some more environmental factors later on,
some of the big ones, what we will deal with in this context
is the relationship between why is it
that when the economy gets bad, violence goes up.
Why does poverty breed violence?
And this is consistently the case.
Why is that occurring?
Some framing theoretically within the context
of frustration and pain and stress
are really reliable predictors of aggressive behavior.
But again, it's the same theme as with alcohol.
Pain makes organisms that are already
predisposed towards being aggressive more aggressive.
It does not do so uniformly across the board.
Frustration, the same exact thing.
Once again, we have something modulating, amplifying,
blunting, damping, all this sort of theme again
and again, some other factor there.
Another example of this.
Another environmental trigger-- and study
this subject somewhere in the 1950s or so and the top thing
that you would get on the list in terms
of environmental releasers for aggression
would be overcrowding.
This was a whole literature that emerged at the time.
A psychologist named Calhoun, John Calhoun,
started this whole field.
And what he would do was take a bunch of rats
living in an enclosure of a certain size
and go about observing them.
And they're going about their rat business.
And now put all of them into a much smaller space,
a higher density, crowd them.
And what he reported was aggression explodes
at that point.
Aggression goes through the roof.
Crowding causing aggression.
The two factoids, or rather the one
factoid that everybody learned from that literature
for decades afterward from the Scientific American papers
was violence would go up to the point
that rats would start killing and cannibalizing each other.
Urban crowding making our next generation of cannibals, which
is exactly what an awful lot of sociologists
are off running with, not to mention
various Southern senators who talked
about the menace of inner city population density
and spawning violence because overcrowding causes aggression.
Whole literature-- and it took a number of years
until people started looking a little bit closer
at the animals.
And on the average, the rate of aggression
does not change with crowding.
You could probably fill in the next sentence by now.
What you see instead is animals that
are already aggressive become more aggressive when
you crowd them.
Animals that are subordinate and unaggressive
become even more weak and withdrawn.
What these early generations of studies were doing wrong
was folks sitting there just looking for the exciting stuff.
Oh, my God.
We just saw a rat cannibalize another one.
I sure never saw that with a big enclosure.
The actual quantitative rates of aggression
do not go up with crowding.
Aggressive individuals become more aggressive then.
And we readily can fit that into scenarios
of frustration, displacement, and that kind of thing.
Now switching back to where we started the other day,
back to hormones.
The short-term hormonal exposure.
And where we had started with short-term
not the hormonal exposure back when
you were a fetus, but in the last minute,
in the last hour, the last couple of days.
Where we started, of course, was testosterone.
And to summarize that again, it is
the same punchline as with testosterone and sexual
behavior.
Testosterone is required for the normal range
of aggressive behavior in every species looked at.
When you castrate males, levels of aggression go down.
Just as critically levels of aggression do not go down to 0.
Very critically there, the more prior social experience
with aggression the more it is maintained after castration.
Replace the testosterone, 10% of normal levels, 100%, 200%.
All of them do the exact same thing.
The brain is sensitive to testosterone,
but it's not sensitive to small little differences in it.
So no individual who is more aggressive than the person
sitting next to them, there is no way
it can ever be attributed to differences
in testosterone levels in the normal healthy range.
Back to the same qualifier from the sex lectures.
Now take someone who instead of having 200% the normal levels,
twice the normal levels, they have tenfold higher levels,
higher than the body ever normally sees
because they are abusing anabolic steroids
and their levels of aggression do indeed go up.
But within the normal range, you gotta
have testosterone but it is necessary but not
sufficient for normal levels.
The brain is not sensitive to small little differences
and it is overwhelmingly modulatory.
That same business again.
Number three in the hierarchy stoked
on testosterone attacks four and five more,
doesn't bother with two and one.
Exaggerating preexisting tendencies.
Testosterone is shortening the lag time
between action potentials in the amygdala
if and only if the amygdala has gotten excited
and, passing on aggressive messages,
testosterone amplifies it, testosterone
not as causing but as modulating that same theme again
and again.
Finally, towards the end of that,
we heard about that in amazing example of hyenas and their sex
reversal system.
One final interesting feature of it, which is we
live within 30 miles of the world's only research
colony of hyenas who live up in the Berkeley hills.
And if the wind is just right, you
can hear them whooping in downtown Berkeley
at night on occasion.
And God knows how many religions that has spawned over there.
[LAUGHTER]
But they've got this hyena colony there.
And these were hyenas that were brought over as pups from East
Africa, from Kenya, as part of studying this weird sex
reversal system.
Hyenas turn out to be models for a whole bunch
of gynecological disorders having
to do with the elevated testosterone levels
in the females.
All of that-- they've now gone through about 20 years
in generations, but the very first generation
they had raised a critical issue.
Back to the other day, hyenas' social systems,
females are dominant to males.
Females are more aggressive than males.
Females have higher testosterone levels.
So the question becomes, you've got a whole bunch
of hyenas that were brought over as pups raised without mothers,
raised in something other than a normal hyena
clan of watching adults.
They're all growing up as pups together without adult models.
Are females going to still wind up
being more aggressive than males?
And what they saw was, yes, indeed.
Females had the same normal higher testosterone levels
as you would find in wild hyenas, the same weirdo
genitals, all of that.
And females were socially dominant.
Whoa.
Hormones and bizarre fake scrotums is destiny.
But what they saw was it took years for the dominant system
to emerge with the females dominating.
It took far longer.
What's that telling us about normal hyenas out there?
It's a mixture of you having lots of testosterone
on board and its physiological consequences
and you getting to watch Mom terrorizing
the males in the neighborhood.
So once again, a combination between social factors,
endocrine modulators.
They eventually got to a classic female dominated social system.
It took them a lot longer though.
Next hormone, hormones to look at, estrogen, progesterone.
Back to, no, we're not going to look at that yet.
Hold on.
Stop.
All of you.
Next what we look at are testosterone levels in females.
Oh, yes.
That again.
Same exact thing as from the sex lecture,
substituted from there.
Females generates certain levels of testosterone
of related androgens from the adrenal gland,
adrenal androgens, maybe 5% the levels you see in males.
And what we saw last week is female
proceptive sexual behavior is dependent on testosterone.
Same exact deal.
Take out the adrenals of a woman,
testosterone levels drop down to 0
at that point and levels of sexual libido, proceptivity,
go down.
Not all the way down.
Depends on how much prior social experience, same song
and dance.
And same song and dance here.
Aggression.
Aggression in females of various species
is amplified by the adrenal androgrens.
Those low levels castrate.
Goes down.
Not all the way down.
Same exact deal again.
It is modulatory in females as well as in males.
Now leaping to estrogen and progesterone.
What's up with them in terms of aggression?
And we had first hints of it from the very first lecture,
that business that a disproportionate share
of female violence is carried out by women
in their perimenstrual period.
The whole notion of perimenstrual syndrome
increasing aggression.
This has been around for a long time
and this holds up in some criminology studies,
though what you see here, of course,
is a gazillion different ways of interpreting it.
First possible interpretation.
All we're looking at here is culture.
Culture that decides that menstruation
is a state that you are unhygienic and need to be
separated from everybody else.
And great novels about red tents and sort
of cultural values on it.
So, of course, behavior changes dramatically
at that time with a peripheralization,
a stigmatization in culture after culture blah, blah.
Cross-cultural argument.
Then there's a personality argument that a lot of people
do.
Looking at the literature, the relationship between
increased aggressiveness around the perimenstrual period.
Again, notice I'm not saying pre-menstrual.
What the literature shows is a couple
of days after just as much as a couple of days before.
So perimenstrual.
Personality differences explaining that.
Then there are the marvelous psychodynamic psychoanalysts
who've been let loose at that for years.
And what they come up with-- this
is one of the great ridiculous sound bytes.
That aggression goes up and women around the time they
are menstruating because this evidence
that they are fertile but have gone another cycle
without getting pregnant throws them into the conflict--
the conflict between-- get this.
This could go on like a doily in the kitchen.
The conflict between being productive and reproductive.
Oh, should I function in society or should I be off having
babies like female hyenas?
And, oh, that's what it's about.
It's the deep psychoanalytic conflict and evidence
that yet again you have passed up the chance
to be a mother and reproductive so you're
going to be in a pissy mood.
[LAUGHTER]
So that's a more psychodynamic theory.
And that one has been around in the literature forever.
But back to the biological one.
Biological one.
So what sort of evidence is it for for that?
So what we got here?
Let's switch from our deal from previously.
So now we've got menstruation, day 28 coming
right in the middle there.
And let us look at this record.
Here is a female, someone who you've been observing.
And you've been observing, in fact, for a couple of years.
And you keep track of any time they do something aggressive.
And what you see after you've got 20 cycles worth of data
is the likelihood of it occurring does something
like that.
That's the perimenstrual irritability.
That's a disproportionate share of women
in prison for violent acts.
That's all of that.
So what do you make of it when told
that this is precisely the profile you
see in a female baboon?
Well, she's probably not getting bummed out
every time she menstruates and wonders whether she really
should be holding off having babies
until she gets to be a partner in the law firm.
What you see there is none of the cultural stuff,
none of the pyschodynamic, and none
of the psychosomatic stuff.
Another realm of explanation.
You see something close to the same exact thing
in female baboons.
So that, and for my money, argues
that there is some major biology going on there amid possibly
relevant cultural factors.
Possibly relevant in terms of there always
being an argument in a certain school of anthropologists
for some decades that you don't see
perimenstrual shifts in behavior in cultures
that are more free about bodies and more sexually uninhibited.
And presumably this tells you that something
about baboons' sexual inhibitions,
there's not a whole lot of evidence
for that perimenstrual mood shifts is
pretty universal across human cultures.
And you see the same exact thing in a female baboon.
So we've got some biology going on there for my money.
None the less, you don't have only biology
because there are all sorts of psychological factors.
One study showing things, for example,
like if you tell a woman that she is one day before having
her period.
And I'm not exactly sure how this one
works, let alone the human subject's permission.
But this was a study done some decades ago.
Women become more irritable.
So a self-fulfilling component.
Tell someone that they are going to have
their period the next day and their male significant other
becomes more irritable.
[LAUGHTER]
Irritability among men who have significant others, women,
peaks around the time that she as menstru-- whoa,
we've got either some sort of viral, infectious, intersexual
thing happening here or we've got strong components having
nothing to do with the biology.
This one, in addition, studies showing that, yes,
there is this mood fluctuation.
On the average there is a larger fluctuation in mood,
affect, when you compare weekend versus week
day, in particular Friday, Saturday versus Monday,
Tuesday.
Bigger fluctuation than the mood changes
you see typically in women around the time
of their period.
So we got some biology here, but nonetheless there's
other stuff going on as well.
So what about the biology?
One thing that immediately comes up
is this issue that, OK, perimenstrual periods,
mood shifts there, are not purely about aggression
and irritability.
They are also about depression and social withdrawal.
That's the time of cycle when women
are most likely to have a depressive episode.
Very, very different scenario there.
So what's up with that?
You begin to get a hint of this looking at the baboons.
What you see is this is the profile
you would see in a high ranking female baboon.
Look at a low ranking female and there's no particular change.
Look instead at a measure of how far
away she stays from everyone else
and it does something like that.
In other words, if you are a low ranking female baboon,
you don't have the option to be irritable to somebody else
and dump on them.
You instead become more socially withdrawn, do less grooming.
So an interaction between place and society, all of that.
So the biology now.
Estrogen, progesterone.
Lots of evidence that their levels
and in particular their ratio is critical to what
is going on here.
Massive changes in the levels of both
of these hormones around the time of one's period.
And does not take a whole lot for the ratios
thus to become very, very skewed.
Back to the advanced endocrinology stuff,
the fact that parts of your brain
are not just measuring the levels
of one hormone or another, but the ratio of the two.
That seems to be pertinent.
What the evidence suggests is in one subset
of women with severe perimenstrual syndrome--
and that's about 10% of the population.
In one subset of those individuals what seems to be
the problem is too much of a drop of progesterone
around the time of your period.
So what's the neurochemistry of that?
Quick memory from a few weeks ago.
What's one of the unlikely things that progesterone does?
[INAUDIBLE]
Yeah.
The GABA receptor stuff.
Progesterone-- by way of often this metabolite, this sort
of breakdown product of it-- progesterone
being able to bind to the receptor for GABA
at a minor tranquilizer binding site
just like where benzodiazepines like Valium bind to.
Progesterone as decreasing anxiety,
progesterone as mildly sedative.
That's one of the interpretations that's
given for what a more than normally
rapid drop of progesterone might have to do with PMS.
Another subgroup of women appear to have
an atypically large drop in levels
of opioids, endogenous opioids, around the time here.
Normally there are levels of beta endorphin,
a neurotransmitter slash hormone with all sorts
of nice effects on mood and things of that sort.
And levels tend to go down around this point.
A subset of women with severe PMS where the marker there
appears to be a particularly fast drop
of opioid beta endorphin levels at the time.
So just the first bits of hints of the endocrinology
of what that is about.
Final hormones.
Final hormones, glucocorticoids, epinephrine, norepinephrine,
glucocorticoids, sympathetic nervous system.
And it's the same exact deal as two days ago.
Looking at the fact that those midbrain,
hindbrain areas get activated during an aggressive act.
Oh, does that teach us something about aggression?
Not in the slightest.
What you have instead is the nonspecificity.
Levels of glucocorticoids will go up roughly equally
whether you were running for your life or running in rage
or running in joy.
That whole deal again, sympathetic arousal.
It's nonspecific.
And back to that sound byte from two days ago,
the opposite of love is not hate.
The opposite of love is indifference.
And endocrinologically, this is the case again.
One interesting piece in the glucocorticoid and sympathetic
nervous system domain.
Take somebody and poke their finger with a pin
or make them physically uncomfortable
or something painful and they activate
the sympathetic nervous system as part of their mild stress
response.
The early stages of it.
One class of people where this doesn't work anywhere near
as much-- sociopaths.
And by now a large literature showing elevated pain
thresholds in people with sociopathic violent disorders
of behavior, elevated pain thresholds
and less sympathetic nervous system responsiveness to pain.
And you should be able to go off and running with that
one easily in so far as metaphorically
what empathy is about, is feeling somebody else's pain.
If your own pain system is on the pretty insensitive side,
that is certainly going to have an impact there.
That's a very consistent finding.
So what we are ready for now is switching over
to longer term environmental ideas about aggression.
Why do I keep pretending as if the chart is here?
Here.
We've now moved over to here.
Shifting from environmental triggers--
not something painful five seconds ago,
not I was expecting you get this food pellet after pressing
the lever 20 times and I didn't get the lever, I'm frustrated.
Not a minute's worth of environmental releasers.
But instead general pictures of what environment
has to do with aggression.
Some of the broad theories that have come out over the years.
Let's take a five minute break before that.
To quickly go through this deal again.
So you've got amino acid precursor.
Tryptophan, that's your building block for making serotonin.
Key enzyme coded for by a gene.
It's a protein.
Key enzyme that turns it into the first step.
And then this enzyme.
There's always a ton around.
It automatically gets turned into serotonin.
So now you have serotonin.
Serotonin will do its thing by way of binding to serotonin
receptors.
And at some point serotonin tone will be broken down
into this waste product.
So a gene coding for this protein,
a gene coding for this one, which we're not interested in.
A bunch of genes coding for the receptors.
And genes coding for these two enzymes.
And the whole point there being that there's
different versions of these genes
for the synthetic enzymes, for the degradative enzymes,
for the receptors.
And thus beginning to look at whether that
predicts differences in levels of aggressive behavior.
So that's what that was about.
In addition, was just told a great story about somebody
who was under tremendous duress to supply
alcohol for her younger 16-year-old sister
and friends at a sweet 16 party and decided,
no way is this happening.
And thus bought a bunch of bottles of something or other
and took the labels off and put other labels on.
And before you knew it, you had a whole bunch
of 16-year-olds acting just asinine
and claiming to be drunk beyond words.
And, yes.
Social modulation of.
[LAUGHTER]
Very, very frequently seen.
And hopefully some of you have taken part in experiments
like that yourselves over the years
or may foist that one off on someone else.
So now pushing over toward some of the broad theories
about environmental triggers for aggression.
And no surprise, theories are a dime a dozen.
All sorts of theorists over the years.
And some of which occasionally feel obliged to actually go
see if there's data supporting it.
But what I'll just touch on briefly
are three very broadly different schools
of thinking about environmental factors in aggression.
The first school is one that says environment is irrelevant.
And you can bet how much I'm going to like that here
in the coming minutes.
And who was the main advocate of that?
Our ever reliable friend Herr Nazi Konrad Lorenz.
Konrad Lorenz, after he had gotten out of his prison camp
after World War II for being a Nazi propagandist
and he sort of dusted himself off and got his ethology
empire going again and remarkably
was forgiven by the other elder fathers of ethology,
including Niko Tinbergen, who spent much of World War
II in a concentration camp and he
is the one who led the move to make sure
that Konrad Lorenz was welcomed back in the community
even though he was an unrepentant Nazi swine.
But-- so after Konrad Lorenz came out,
in the early '60s he wrote a book which
was one of the most influential anthropology books of all time,
a book called On Aggression.
And that was the coffee table book for half a decade.
That was the book that people had book clubs about if they
were intellectuals.
On Aggression had a huge influence on people's thinking
at the time.
And what was the Lorenz's basic premise as to
what were the environmental components of aggression?
What was aggression about?
It was exactly the book you would
expect to be written by an unrepentant Nazi.
Because his theme was just following biological orders.
In Lorenz's view, on his view as to what aggression is about,
it is inevitable.
There is no environmental requirement.
Aggression is universal and inevitable.
Famous quote of his that he gave, for example,
near his death in the 1970s to Newsweek.
There is no love without hate.
Wow.
He must have been a great father.
[LAUGHTER]
But what you see is a whole book, a whole premise,
built on that.
A number of the notions, the basic themes
that ran through the book.
Number one, aggression is universal.
It is there in all individuals.
Number two, what he called his hydraulic model of aggression.
And if this sounds silly, you should actually
go see the book because he had actual diagrams of like pseudo
toilet bowl plumbing stuff telling us how aggression
works as follows.
There is some aggression toilet bowl water tank which is slowly
filling up with water.
And the deal is that the higher the levels of water get,
the higher the aggressive drive, the less
of an environmental trigger it takes to provoke the aggression
to come out.
The higher the levels, the more easily
a releasing stimulus will trigger fixed action
pattern of aggression.
Intrinsic in his model also and explicitly stated
was eventually his toilet bowl fills up with enough-- actually
it's not the toilet bowl, it's the tank.
The tank fills up with enough water
that it begins to dribble over the top
and thus you get spontaneous aggression.
His model was with the passage of time,
the longer It has been since an organism has been aggressive,
the less of an environmental releaser
is needed to provoke the aggression until it
is ultimately spontaneous.
The third piece of his model was just like a toilet bowl
again, which is when you have an aggressive act you've just
emptied out the tank.
You deplete the aggressive drive.
You deplete it so that it resets the system,
starting a refractory period.
That aggression decreases the likelihood
of aggression occurring immediately afterward.
This was the Lorentzian model, which
was enormously, enormously influential
and everybody learned about this in Intro Anthro
through the 1960s. '60s And it would take you
about two seconds to shred this one.
How many of you have ever murdered anyone?
You never know.
People are kind of drowsy, checking their emails
and suddenly confess.
How many of you plan to murder somebody?
Yes, we are like the most dangerous aggressively species
on this planet and the vast majority of us
will never have a physical fight with somebody
since we left seventh grade or so.
Aggression is not universal.
Aggression is not inevitable.
And aggression is not sublimated into psychological processes,
which thus can pass as support for this model.
The final thing that does it in is aggression
is not self-depleting.
Aggression is self-reinforcing.
And all you have to do is look at the crowd
contagion, the emotional contagion,
that occurs in soccer stadiums when people start fighting.
Crowd violence, all of that.
Aggression is not self-depleting and resetting the clock.
Aggression stimulates more aggression.
Aggression legitimatizes it.
It habituates you to it it.
Is not fitting Lorenz's model at all.
Meanwhile, on the other end of the block,
was a very, very different sort of view.
And this is one that permeates a lot of thinking in the field.
And this is one built around the notion
that aggression is ultimately all about frustration.
It is about frustration, pain, stress, fear, anxiety.
And this was a view very heavily pushed
by Soviet researchers in the period of the Soviet Union.
A very Marxist view because essentially
what you conclude at the end is this theme
I keep bringing up every time pointing out
that the amygdala has something to do with both aggression
and fear.
That in a world in which no amygdaloid neuron
need have an action potential out of fear,
there's not going to be aggression.
So this is the extreme version of the frustration displacement
model.
And what is emphasized in that is a lot of data.
You look at, for example, when levels of unemployment go up,
levels of spousal abuse go up, levels of child abuse go up.
When the economy gets bad, the same exact thing.
Laboratory animals.
Shock a rat, it will bite the one sitting next to it.
All of these versions of displacement aggression.
In a baboon troop, for example, almost 50% of aggression
is displacement aggression after somebody loses a fight
or loses access to a resource.
Almost certainly this begins to explain
two really, really depressing things about unequal societies.
First one being that the poorer you are, the more likely
you are to be violent, the more likely
you are to commit some sort of criminal violence.
And when the economy gets bad, the rates of that get worse.
It gets more skewed.
And the other ironic piece of all of that
is that when crime goes up in lower socioeconomic strata,
overwhelmingly it is crime turned on the other poor.
When crime goes up during periods
of frustration and mistreatment of lower socioeconomic classes,
it does not take the form of suddenly everybody going
and deciding to like scale the wall to the palace there
and rip off some of the Ming vases.
It is victimizing the people who are victims
right next door to you.
During times of economic downturns,
the rates of crime in poorer neighborhoods go up
and it's almost always turned on individuals
in the neighborhood.
So that supports this picture as well.
One interesting thing that argues against frustration
displacement models.
And this is looking at animals.
And looking at what happens to levels of aggression
during periods of famine.
And this has been studied in a surprising number of species.
And what you've got are two very opposing predictions.
First one is if what aggression is about is built out
of frustration, need pain, fear, hunger, things of that sort,
the prediction would be when you look at populations of animals
during periods of famine, aggression
should go up over food resources.
And this comes with the qualifier
that these studies have to be during a period when
animals are having to work harder
to get the normal amounts of food
rather than that they are being calorically deprived
because obviously behavior is going to be changed then.
So frustration displacement model
predicts that during periods of famine,
aggression goes up in social species.
A very different model would predict exactly the opposite.
And what the bulk of the literature has shown
is during periods of famine in wild animals in social groups,
aggression tends to go down rather than up.
So at least in that realm that tends
to be a vote against one particular type of frustration
displacement aggression.
It tends to go down.
And in fact, the term has been given for that by people
who think about these things.
It's referred to as behavioral fat.
Why does aggression go up, for example, among young male lions
not during the periods of the year when there is not
much food but during the peak of, say, zebra migration?
What's going on there?
You've got a lion.
It's sitting there saying, I'm not hungry.
My stomach is full.
There's nobody to hunt.
Nobody's going to mate with me right now,
so I might as well go get in a fight with somebody.
And in that scenario what aggression is about
is use of surplus resources when there is an excess.
It is behavioral fat.
And in lots of species you see aggression
as a model of behavioral fat rather than
purely resource deprivation.
One interesting interpretation that I've
seen of one type of violence, which is the notion
that violence, aggression, competition,
being built around limited resources, a very interesting
interpretation of clan violence, of feuds, of vendettas,
of retributive violence, which has been a large percentage
of violence over the centuries.
A way to formalize that is to think
that these are two different clans at war
with each other competing for a very, very
singular resource, the one who does
the last bit of retribution.
That's what they're competing for.
So an interesting interpretation there.
Third broad branch of people thinking
about theorizing about aggression-- and these are,
of course, our behaviorists.
Back to the Watson and Skinner and give me
a child of any background and let
me control rewards and positive reinforcement and punishments
and negative reinforcement, all of that,
and I will be able to regulate any aspect of behavior.
We know that whole approach by now.
We saw all the ways in which that
fails in explaining classical ethologically based behavior.
But in the standard behaviorist view have enough opportunities
for punishment and you can shape, you can condition away,
you can eliminate aggressive behavior.
And all you need to do is think for two seconds
and see that that is very limited in its applicability.
Nicely, huge number of experiments
have been going on for two centuries in this country
looking at that, which is looking at rates of crime
as levels of punishment, the length of jail sentences,
the likelihood of being caught, things
like that as the punishment likelihood
and severity changes, does that change the likelihood of crime?
Most studied is the very specific question of,
does the death penalty decrease the amount of murders?
As different states have eliminated the death penalty,
as they've reinstated it, things of that sort,
does changing your behaviorist realm of punishment
that you could get for killing someone,
does that decrease the incidence of murders?
And what you wind up seeing is in some cases, yes.
Absolutely.
When you are looking at murders that
involve premeditated violence.
When it is someone who is sitting there
for months planning how to do this,
when somebody who is hired to kill somebody.
Things of that sort.
When it is planned in advance, increased the likelihood
of death penalty does indeed decrease the likelihood
of premeditated murder.
However, it does not touch for a second impulsive murder, crimes
of passion, things of that sort.
And that makes perfect sense.
There is no person who has just been insulted in a bar
and pulls out a gun who stops for a second
and thinks, wait a second.
Did the state legislature pass that new law last week?
Let me think about it.
They don't think about that because they don't think.
And the majority of violence in that realm is unpremeditated.
Mostly what the studies have shown
is changing the severity of punishment
for murder does not particularly change the murder rates.
So these broad different sorts of views-- aggression
as inevitable, biologically inevitable, all environment can
do is shape the frequency a bit.
Aggression as solely a product of fear, frustration, anxiety,
resource deprivation.
Aggression solely as a set of behaviors
that could be shaped by reward and punishment
to the point of going away.
What do you actually see when you
see some aspects of environmental impacts
on aggression?
Particularly early in life.
What do you wind up seeing in terms
of learning to be aggressive?
The theme that comes through over and over again,
as I've referred to, is the notion
that a lot of what early experience is about
is not learning how to be aggressive,
but learning when to be aggressive.
The appropriate context for it.
Whoa.
My page has disappeared.
No wonder it seemed to have just jumped.
Let's just do that for a moment here.
Oh, that's what we're talking about next.
So let's get rid of that.
So what that ushers us into, I say,
trying to make it seem as if that's a seamless transition--
what, OK.
Let's all sing for a couple of minutes
here while I look at this piece of paper.
[LAUGHTER]
So what this now brings up is, what
does early experience-- in terms of environment,
in terms of upbringing-- what does that
have to do with aggressive behavior, empathy, compassion,
all the things we are looking at here?
Because never more than during development
do these themes of is aggression inevitable,
is aggression purely about social learning,
is aggression purely about displacement--
never more is it clearer in terms of the consequences
than during early development.
So what's the transition during development
towards the development of aggression,
the development of empathy, the development
of compassionate behavior, cooperation?
All of that.
Widely, widely studied.
Tons of research that's been done in this area.
Much of it ultimately framed along the lines of,
what is the development of moral standards?
Moral development in kids.
But what's pertinent comes long before that.
Very early in life the most pertinent initial transition
is when kids start distinguishing
between animate and inanimate objects.
And that comes remarkably early during the first few days
to weeks of life.
That's a very early transition.
And as I think we have heard already, what you see
is this specialized region of the brain,
the fusiform cortex that responds to faces,
and the fact that autistic individuals, that part
of their brains do not respond to faces as in everybody else,
not necessarily distinguishing between animate and inanimate.
So initial stage, first beginning
to get that dichotomy down.
What then emerges is the first evidence
of kids beginning to differentiate themselves
from the world around them, beginning
to get a sense of self.
And this is where kids begin to get
ego boundaries of some sort.
Before that happens, a kid very typically
views themselves as basically being continuous with mom.
And this is the world where you see a 12-month-old where
mom has a cut on her finger and has been walking around
with a Band-Aid and the kid is there all day
saying that they have an owie on their finger.
Because they are mom, mom is them.
There is no particular boundary between them.
Around a year of age is when you begin
to see this starting to happen.
So a sense of self.
What that, of course, has to be a precursor for it
a sense of others being selves, theory of mind.
So we've already heard the building blocks
of theory of mind.
When do kids first begin to recognize
that not only are they a distinct individual,
but there are other individuals with different information,
with different thoughts, ultimately
with different feelings?
And when does that begin to emerge?
Typically between age of three to five.
And we've already heard some of the basic sort of tests
that are done to reveal that.
And what you also see is it is very, very
emotionally contingent.
Take a kid who is doing great theory of mind when
you read them some abstract story about Sally Mae
or, who is it?
Sarah Ann?
Sally.
Sally Ann?
OK, I seem to not be able to get this one down.
That kid with the doll there.
Read them and they may be at a point
where they are three, six months into being able to perfectly do
tests like that.
But get them in an emotional aroused circumstance
where it's something they really care about as
opposed to like some story there and the theory of mind
goes down the tubes at that point.
It is not an all or none transition.
It is one that is vulnerable, potentially,
to strong emotions.
Go figure, not surprising.
So what a lot of people have thought about is,
is theory of mind a prerequisite for empathy?
Is it possible to feel somebody else's pain
and act upon it without having a sense
that there is a somebody else who has
different thoughts and, most importantly,
different feelings?
And they can be bad feelings, things of that sort.
Is theory of mind a prerequisite for empathy?
And the general sense among a lot of people in the field
is, yes, indeed.
It is necessary but not sufficient.
And where you see the most dramatic dissociation
between theory of mind and empathy
is when you look at sociopaths.
Every sort of test that could be done,
sociopaths have spectacular theories of mind.
They are incredibly good at manipulating people.
And manipulation requires a very, very astute theory
of mind to be able to do that.
Sociopaths have the prerequisite of theory of mind
that most people think that empathy requires.
But what you have there is it stops at that point.
It does not continue.
It is a means for exploitation rather than the transition
into true empathy.
As we've already heard, there is evidence
for empathy like of that sort and theory of mind in apes,
so we're not the only ones.
So general view being that you don't get empathy
until you get theory of mind.
But there's always been this confusing sort
of counter bit of evidence where you see stuff
like the world of a 15-month-old where somebody
is sitting in the room crying.
And often in experiments someone who is pretending to.
And the 15-month-old will come up
and try to give the paci to the person
and try to put it in their mouth.
Here, feel better.
So possible interpretations, number one
being that this is already evidence of empathy.
Empathy not yet having the theory of mind element of not
only recognizing there's somebody else, but not
everybody likes pacies, especially mine
that I've been slobbering on.
Other interpretation, an irritation decreasing strategy,
which is it's simply distressing having the person
in there acting all upset.
And what's going to make them shut up?
I know, I'm going to go over to them and give them my stuffy
and maybe that will work.
It is not empathy.
It is attempts to get away from this irritating context.
Studies very interestingly, though, arguing against that.
Take kids during their first three to six months of life
and show them a scenario where two people are interacting.
One of them needs help and the other helps them.
Or one of them needs help and the other doesn't.
Or one of them has something and the other one
takes the thing away from them.
So either pro-social behavior, neutral,
or anti-social behavior.
And kids in that age range already
prefer to look at the individual who's doing
the pro-social helpful thing.
So some sort of elements of this are already in there
before formal theory of mind.
None the less, that seems to be a big important part of it.
Next, so you got yourself theory of mind
and the next step in there is not only recognition
that somebody else has other thoughts
but they have other feelings.
They can be very different from yours.
They can be legitimate.
And what we begin to enter now is the more formal world
of moral development in kids.
And the name, the-- without question-- the most influential
psychologist in this whole field, one of the biggest
names in the whole field in the last century,
this guy Lawrence Kohlberg.
And Kohlberg's famed stages of moral development in kids.
How many of you are familiar with Kohlberg?
How many are not?
Good.
Kohlberg is.
So Kohlberg.
Lawrence Kohlberg was a psychologist at Harvard,
super influential.
And he came out of tradition established
by the Swiss psychologist.
It's never possible to just say the psychologist.
You always have to see the Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget.
And Piaget brought in the whole notion
of sequences of development, sequences as in kids
crawl before they walk.
Kids comprehend language before they begin to produce it.
And Piaget generated a whole world of information
about stages of cognitive development.
At what age do kids have object permanence?
You cover something, is the object still existing
or do you get all surprised when you take the lid off
and it's still there and start breathing faster?
Stages of cognitive maturation.
And Kohlberg came out of that tradition
looking instead at sequential development
of moral development.
The theme that ran through this whole sort of world
of sequential whatevers is that you
don't have the sequence change.
There are no kids ever who run before they're crawling.
There are no kids who are fluidly producing language
before they comprehend it.
It's a set sequence.
What does experience do?
It regulates the rate, the speed with which
you make the transitions.
So Kohlberg introduced the whole notion
that there are also sequences of moral development.
Very broadly what he came up with
were six different categories, six different steps.
And people, I take it, have been spending the rest of time
deciding whether there is, in fact, 60 sub parts of that
and splitting and lumping all of that.
Broadly these six stages fall into three categories,
what he called preconventional moral reasoning,
conventional moral reasoning, and post-conventional moral
reasoning.
You might have guessed that after the pre in conventional,
but those were the three phases.
And broadly they could be termed or framed
in terms of what the motivation is for acting morally.
In the preconventional stage, why do you act morally?
Because you may get caught.
Because you may get punished.
Because if you act morally, maybe you'll get a reward.
What's in it for me?
A very ego centered set of motivations for moral behavior.
Then transitioning into the conventional stage.
How that is typically framed as is
your motivations for your moral behavior
are based on shared group values, shared group
conventions.
Things built around social norms.
Rules, laws, even a higher level of belief
in the importance of law and order
in a society transcending any given law,
a notion that if you follow conventional rules
of moral reasoning you will be viewed by society at large
as a good girl, as a good boy at whatever developmental stage.
Your moral reasoning being built around society-wide rules
and implications.
Finally, the post-conventional stage
is built around transcending that.
The word transcendence plays a lot
in that realm of Kohlberg's thinking.
The notion that there are all sorts of examples
of moral reasoning, moral decision making, where
you are, in fact, violating the rules of society.
You are breaking a law.
You are breaking a social norm.
What's the motivation there?
The notion that there are things that
are more important than the laws of society.
There are things that are more important than what
everybody else thinks.
What this has because it is the world of civil disobedience.
This is the world of saying, bad laws need to be broken.
This is the world of people saying,
I don't care if I get punished.
I don't care what everybody else is doing.
This is the right thing to do.
That would be a post-conventional Kohlberg
stage.
The main thinking that goes into sort of Kohlberg
then looking at adult moral reasoning
is as you go through the various steps and these sub steps
and all sorts of tests that ostensibly sort of tapped
into it, not everybody reaches the same Kohlberg
stage in adulthood.
People will stop in their conventional stage.
Some people will get to a partial post-conventional
stage.
The way of thinking of people within this framework
is, how far do you progress in your cold Kohlbergian
sort of ladder of complexity, sophistication,
in your moral reasoning?
Ways in which this would look.
Take somebody and you can have a Kohlberg stage of being
very focused on the individual.
Sort of studies that will be done.
You have a kid who believes there is a baseball team.
And they're told that here's a bunch of kids.
There's one more spot left on the baseball team.
And this has always been a team for boys and boys
play baseball better than girls.
This was the sort of way this type of study
was done some decades ago.
And here's a girl.
Typically we don't allow girls on the team.
But this one girl wants to play.
And what you see is at a preconventional stage what kids
are most likely to do is reason morally on the level
of individual consequences.
Saying things like, well, she hasn't gotten to play before.
All of these boys have gotten to play before.
She's never gotten to play before.
It would be fair.
She's the one who should get to play.
By the time you get to kids reaching
conventional moral reasoning stages, what
they're doing instead is saying, well, boys are better.
We need to put one of the boys on because the team will
be more successful.
Suddenly moving from the level of individual consequences
to norms and law and order and things of that sort.
So the general framework of Kohlberg.
And amid that becoming the dominating model.
There has been a gazillion totally appropriate criticisms
of it.
One is focusing right off the bat on gender and the fact
that Kohlberg, doing his stuff mostly in the 1960s,
had the same biases as most everyone of the time, which
was a very disproportionate share of the studies
were done on males rather than females.
The notion that Kohlbergian reasoning sequences
of moral development are a better fit for what
happens in boys and men than in women, girls.
That boys are more about justice girls are more about
affiliation, reconciliation, things of that sort.
So a gender critique.
Next is a cultural critique.
And there's been a whole world of people
doing cross-cultural moral development in [INAUDIBLE] type
studies.
And one thing that you see is that the stages
don't necessarily move in this inevitable sequence
in different cultures.
So that has been sort of a blow to this.
This is how all humans are.
What you also begin to see is when
you begin to couple sort of other values
with your moral stage.
For example, what studies show is people
who are trained in childhood to respect ability more than
effort are far more likely to endorse social norm
moral reasoning over social justice reasoning.
That is shown.
What's that one about?
Again, ability-- having something
that you view as transcendent, as not intrinsic to sort
of the effort of the person.
That's making no sense.
I just tied that into knots.
Don't listen to what I just said.
Nonetheless, here's what they have found.
People who were brought up to value ability more than effort
tend to value moral reasoning for social norms
rather than for social justice.
They are less likely to get to a post-conventional Kohlberg
stage.
So that being one of the backbones of people
who think about this.
But a whole world of additional things
in moral development and kids.
How do kids first learn that sometimes it's OK to lie?
How do kids learn that, in fact, you're
supposed to tell grandma that you love the sweater even
though you think it's awful?
Or do not tell her you already have this toy?
How do you kids learn to lie?
Related to that, how do kids first
learn the difference between rules and principles?
Rules that are meant to be less breakable,
principles where you are having to balance them to weigh them.
When do kids first learn about the possibility
of there being bad laws?
That just because something is a law
doesn't mean it is necessarily good?
When do kids first start to consistently make distinctions
between or see the similarities between intended harm
and successful harm?
At an earlier stage kids discount activities
that don't actually produce the harm
that it was meant to if it's not successful.
When do kids begin to see that they are more similar than they
initially respond to?
All of these nuances, subtleties, here.
Other ways that people have thought about development
of aggression.
Now comes the issue of peer groups and community
and aspects of what sort of world are you being exposed to?
What this always comes down to is,
what are the effects on violence in growing up
in a violent setting and being witness to violence
and being a victim of violence?
We've already seen one realm of this
which is the greater the incidence of childhood abuse,
the greater the likelihood of adult anti-social behavior
and a huge interaction with genes
that have a relevance to the neurochemistry.
What else is shown?
Consistently, study after study, shows
that independent of family circumstances,
socioeconomic status, personal experience of violence,
after controlling for all of that,
growing up in a neighborhood where
there is a lot of violence feeds into a higher
rate of violence in adulthood.
What it does is rationalize it.
What it does is it desensitizes.
So that is shown consistently.
What is shown is there is even a stronger effect, tapping
right into this, when one is witness
to violence within the family.
So violence within neighborhoods.
This was worked on a number of years ago.
Sociologist, psychiatrist at Harvard
named Felton Earls going through very, very careful studies
controlling for all sorts of factors
of how many violent acts were kids
seeing in various communities as they grew up.
And that is a very strong predictor in and of itself.
Violent acts within the family even more so.
That, of course, brings up another one
of the great perpetual questions is,
what is the effect on adult violence of having
been a kid growing up watching a lot of violent television
or a lot of violent movies or, as the studies are now
beginning to be there, to ask violent video games?
What's that one about?
And every parent for decades has known,
of course, what the worry, which is watching violence
in any sort of version of media like this
is going to foster violence intensely.
Well studied subject.
And what the results generally show
is-- yes, here it comes again.
The same exact thing.
Watching a lot of violent television when you were a kid
makes you more violent if you already are
tending towards being violent.
What it does is it exaggerates the pre-existing social
tendencies.
You know that drill by now.
After this lecture you could now pull out half a dozen examples
of x does not cause whatever, but it magnifies or blunts
preexisting tendencies.
That's what the literature consistently shows.
Violent television, movies, reading material
and violent video games does not increase the likelihood
of being violent.
It's only in kids who are already
predisposed towards that.
Next, more aspects of environment.
Here we have the summary of the classic study that was
done a couple of decades ago.
Couple at the University of Toronto named Daly and Wilson.
And what they did was look at the likelihood
of men committing murder as a function of their age.
And they were interested in age because they were viewing that
as a proxy for testosterone levels.
And what they showed looking in three different cities--
Chicago, Toronto, and London-- which was in all those cities
your likelihood of being violent or committing a murder,
if you were male was somewhere late teenage years
into early 20s or so.
I drew this a little bit wrong.
And that was fascinating to them because that
happens to be the time of life when males have their highest
testosterone levels.
And what was hugely interesting in that study
was that the curves were superimposable in these three
different cities.
One American city, one Canadian city, one British city.
So you could now ask the sort of question
that we've had coming up since the behavior genetics
lectures, which is if you could know only one
thing about these group of individual men
and you want to know something about predictability
of their being aggressive, what's the one thing you would
want to know?
Well, it would be mighty useful to know how old they are.
Because this suggests a big age effect and maybe that's
got something to do with the high testosterone
at that point.
And one of these sort of relevant to that,
sort of a classic sort of sound byte in criminology,
is one of the leading causes of a decrease in criminal behavior
is people turning age 25.
It's a very, very strong maturational curve.
So look at that.
Look at this is important.
This is sort of life history trajectory.
But then you look at something even more interesting,
which is you ask, so how many murders are there
in each of these cities?
And in their database the London one averaged 30 year,
Toronto averaged 50, and Chicago averaged 600.
So now you have a choice.
You could find out one fact and one fact only.
Do I want to know how old this individual is or-- let's even
be fancier-- do I want to know this individual's
testosterone levels and his age?
Do I want to know that information
or do I want to know what society he's been growing up
with?
Without question you get more predictability.
This is far more important.
We now can sort of put inheritability type
interpretations.
Yeah, this is important.
But it doesn't hold a candle to whatever
these environmental factors are in there-- far, far
bigger effects than the age effect happening here.
What else?
So again, this business about socialization involving
lots of teaching of context.
And more evidence for this came from one of the all time
classic studies, one that was referred to in the sex
lectures.
And this was the work by that guy Harry Harlow
raising captive rhesus monkeys.
And we heard different variations.
Raising them without a mother.
Raising them in social groups with peers.
Raising them in complete social isolation.
And what we heard last week was, it
did not change the fixed action patterns of sexual behavior.
It changed the context.
In other words, you had monkeys who
had grown up in some of the most of the isolated environments
and they were trying to do sex normally but just with things
that the monkeys don't normally have sex with.
The same exact thing in the realm of aggression here.
Being raised, for example, in social isolation
as a rhesus monkey, then in the young adulthood you're
put into a social group and you have perfectly normal threat
yawns.
You have perfectly normal fixed action patterns
of dominance and subordination.
What you don't know is who you should be doing it to.
And Harlow showed that these animals then put
into social groups were threatening
high ranking males they shouldn't
have been going anywhere near.
Were terrified and subordinating themselves
to little pipsqueak infants there, things of that sort.
They had not learned the appropriate social context.
And that's an awful lot of what's going on.
Example of this.
And this is one that I actually observed
in my baboons some years ago and this business about context.
Back to baboons and female baboons, the business there.
If you are a high ranking female,
you have far more options to be aggressive than if you're
a low ranking one.
You inherit your rank from your mother.
If your mother is number one in the troop,
you, her first daughter, will be number two.
If your mother was number 12 and your her second daughter,
you're going to be number 14.
It's a hereditary system.
And this was some years ago where it just
happened in one of my troops the highest ranking female who
was still fertile, her mother matriarch
was one step above her.
But this female, the highest ranking
for a female, gave birth, had her first daughter.
And it just happened a day later one
of the lower ranking females in the troop
also gave birth and had a daughter.
So suddenly you've got this great side by side comparison.
And what you see was every developmental landmark
the high ranking kid was hitting earlier than the other kid just
in terms of sheer physical maturation, coordination,
all of that.
When they were about a week old, they
had their first social interaction.
Low ranking infant spots the high ranking one
and obviously is thrilled, finally
seeing somebody else the same size as them
instead of just looking at everybody's knees.
And the low ranking one goes wobbling over
to sort of greet this other one.
And as she gets about three steps away
from a high ranking infant, low ranking mom
leans over, grabs her daughter by the tail,
and pulls her back.
And she had just gotten her first lesson
in her appropriate social rank and her appropriate social
behavior.
She had just gotten the first lesson
that that is not somebody you go up to and interact with.
If you're going to interact with her,
what it's going to consist of is you sitting real still
and don't make any eye contact and hope
she doesn't notice you.
And if she does, immediately make a subordinate gesture.
You do not go and walk up to her to greet her.
And the amazing thing is at that point you pick up
and you come back 25 years later and there
are going to be two old ladies out in the savanna there doing
the same exact ominous interactions
that they learned in their first week of life.
Very, very early social training for this.
Finally, another bit of evidence for that social training, which
we already heard about, the captive hyenas growing up
without adults there took much longer
to come through with the same social dominance system
that you would see with animals in the wild.
So the question then becomes, amid all
of this social environment mattering hugely,
how important are parents and how important is peer group?
And a very, very interesting book
came out about a decade ago by a psychologist
named Judith Rich Harris called The Nurture Assumption.
And what she did was basically strongly
attack the literature on parental influence
on child development.
And her argument was that peer influences
are vastly more powerful than the field usually recognizes.
Great story with her.
She was about 60 at the time.
And many decades before she had been a graduate student
in psychology at Harvard.
And something was not working out
and she was expelled from the program.
And the chair of the department, a guy named
George Miller at the time, was the one who told her
that this wasn't working out.
So good luck and off you go to trade school
and she proceeded to, never finishing her degree,
become a science writer and writing science books
for kids or whatever.
And around age 55 she started writing this book, which
wound up being an amazing book, extremely
influential in the field, where she got all sorts of prizes
for being the first book by a young author.
Young author, 60 years old at that point.
And one of the great ironies was she
got like the grand prize for the first book
at the annual meeting of the American Psychological
Association, getting this prize called the George Miller
Award given out by the now very elderly George Miller.
So one of those like a nice ironic ending things and she
didn't like trip him up or something like that
as she perhaps might have considered.
So Judith Rich Harris.
So her basic argument is that peer socialization is really,
really one of the most powerful things.
And where she begins her argument
is one which, as soon as you think about it,
is really striking.
You look at children who are growing up in a household
where the home language is a different one
than the dominant language in the culture.
You're growing up in an immigrant family.
And what the studies show is by age four or five
you were developing the accent of the community around you,
of your peer groups.
By age four or five you were already
beginning to become embarrassed by your parent's accent.
By age four or five you were beginning
to answer their questions or their conversation
in the home language and answering it
in the outside language.
This occurs at an amazingly early age.
And as soon as you think about it, oh,
of course, somebody whose parents are from Maine
but they grew up down in Louisiana,
they're not going to grow up with a Maine accent.
They may be able to mimic their parents very readily.
But they're going to develop a regional accent.
People pick up the accents of their peer group,
not of their parents.
So she uses that sort of as the jumping off point
for beginning to argue all the different ways in which peer
groups are the things that matter.
And at the end of the day what parents
are mostly good for is determining what peer groups
kids have access to.
Sort of evidence she would show.
And this begins the whole world of
conformity and conventionalized behavior by groups.
This begins a whole world of the studies where
showing you arbitrarily break kids into groups by age group
and they start having disparaging beliefs
about the other group.
This is suddenly Zimbardo studies.
This is suddenly put people arbitrarily
into one category or role and they
begin to over identify with that group.
Here is one of the greatest bits of evidence for peer
socialization I've ever heard.
And this was documented in at least two different people's
memoirs.
People who were actors on the set
of the original Planet of the Apes movies in the 1960s.
And what they noted-- I think you could
either there, besides being one of the three or four humans,
you could either be a chimp or a gorilla
or an orangutan all of which were not anatomically
correct or politically correct.
But what they wound up seeing there
was two of these people in their memoirs
noted that by the first week of filming having happened
people sat at lunch separated by species.
[LAUGHTER]
All of the actors who were chimps ate together.
All of the onee-- and these were people who had friends,
some of their best friends were orangutans and things
of that sort who they had known for years.
But two different people's memoirs
noting sort of-- who were actors in that-- noting
this bizarre thing that emerged that people would only
have lunch with their other primate species.
So that presumably vindicates everything
that Judith Rich Harris says.
So what she has done is reinterpret certain findings.
For example, showing that one of the things that you find
is kids growing up, boys growing up,
in households without a father have a higher
chance of anti-social violence as an adult. And what she does
is take apart that literature and shows
that what the actual variable is, is that boys growing up
in families without a father, single parent
households, single mother, they are more likely to live
in a poorer neighborhood.
And it is, in fact, the peer socialization there which
is the driving force on it.
Fancy statistics to show that.
That's the sort of argument she makes.
Finally, one of the most interesting studies
that's ever occurred in this realm
came out about 15 years ago.
One law professor here at Stanford and one economist
at University of Chicago making a very interesting argument
as a predictor of criminal behavior in people.
And what these two did, Levitt and Donahue, they
dealt with what was then emerging
as a really interesting sociological phenomenon which
was that somewhere since the late 1980s,
the crime rate in this country has been plummeting.
Every city, every state.
It's been going way down.
And for years people have been wrestling with,
what's going on the decreased crime rate in general?
If you have a more conservative bent which you would emphasize
is building of more prisons during this period, three
strike laws, things like that that
have put in more institutional punishment, more policing.
If you have a more liberal bent, what you emphasize
is how good the economy was during the '90s.
But that winds up being problematic
because the crime rate has continued
to drop over the last three, four years
amid the economy tanking.
All these various explanations explain a bit of it,
but what these guys argued was as follows.
That the decreased crime rate that
started in the United States in the late 1980s
was due to Roe v. Wade.
Here's what they would show.
They would show that as each state would legalize abortion,
you would have about a 12 to 15 year lag time
before you would start to have the crime rate drop.
The crime rate during the first five years
of the crime rate dropping would entirely
be due to fewer teenagers entering the criminal justice
system.
By the time it was a decade and a half or so
past Roe versus-- past that first point--
the drop in crime rate was entirely due to fewer 15
to 30-year-olds.
And it just marched out from there state by state.
What their numbers showed when they did what were currently
some pretty fancy convincing statistics
was that Roe versus Wade accounted for about 50%
of the drop in crime.
What's that telling you?
One of the most depressing things I can imagine,
which is a huge, huge predictor of growing up
to be a violent antisocial individual
is having been born when nobody wanted you to be born.
And what Roe v. Wade, what the ability to have abortions,
introduced in much of the country
at that time-- introduced was the ability of someone
to not have a child who they didn't want to have.
Being born to a mother who doesn't want to have you,
that turns out to be a pretty big predictor of life not going
well after that.
Final piece.
Final piece in this, which is now
when you look at all of this development
and aggression and moral whatevers,
what does it wind up looking like in adulthood?
What this translates into is asking the question,
how much does one stage of Kohlbergian moral development
actually predict who does something moral?
In other words, is there a good correlation
between moral reasoning and moral behavior?
And what the literature is absolutely clear on
is there's not a particularly good connection.
You've got some fancy dancy post-conventional transcendent
Kohlbergian stage and you even have a certificate to prove it.
And that's not remotely a predictor
of you being more likely to be the person who
steps out of the anonymous crowd and saves the drowning child.
There's no connection with Kohlberg stage.
Having the fancier Kohlberg stage
is a pretty good predictor that you'll be a moral philosophy
professor of an Ivy League college instead of a state
school.
If you're stuck in an earlier Kohlbergian stage,
it's a very abstract academic measure.
It is not a predictor at all over who
will do the truly brave, unexpected moral acts.
So what's of that about?
That taps into something that I think we've already alluded to
in here, which is certain ways in which information is stored,
certain places in the brain that information
is stored as follows.
So there is this dichotomy in sort
of the neurobiology of learning between what
is viewed as explicit learning and implicit.
Explicit declarative learning, implicit procedural learning.
Explicit declarative learning is you learn a fact.
You know a fact.
You know that the fact.
You can consciously make use of the fact
and strategize and use it in an executive way.
Implicit procedural memory instead
is stuff that, as always termed, your hands
know better than your head does.
How to do stuff with your hands.
The other day sort of showing that in terms of damage
to the amygdala and the frontal cortex
in people with Alzheimer's disease.
Explicit declarative memory goes down the tubes.
But this is the person who can still knit.
This is the person who could still drive a car.
Things of that sort.
Procedural implicit memory is not
stored in the hippocampus and cortex.
It is predominantly a phenomenon of the cerebellum.
So you look at the people who do the profoundly brave
stepping out of the crowd steps.
They're the ones who, regardless of what their Kohlbergian stage
might be on their essays that they write for college finals,
when you look at the people who actually do something
what you see are two factors that consistently come up.
And this has mostly been studied by the Carnegie Foundation
that every year gives out awards for the most
heroic acts of the years.
And they've actually studied who these people are,
what the differences are.
The first one is that you have grown up
with a very strong, consistent, frequently
stated imperative to act morally and to act bravely
and to not care what other people think.
That's the first thing that you see.
And the second thing that always pops up
is one that is the complete neurobiological logical outcome
of that, which is when they then interview these people
and say you leapt out of this crowd
and ran into this burning building
and almost got yourself killed to save this child who
you didn't even know, what were you thinking when you did it?
And people's answer is always the same.
I wasn't thinking.
I didn't think.
Before I knew it, I had run in there.
Before I knew it, I had leapt into the river.
What are we looking at here?
We are looking at a moral act not as
the outcome of your frontal cortex wrestling you
into being brave and moral and all of that.
You were looking at an implicit pathway.
You were looking at, I didn't think.
Before I knew it I have leapt in the river.
You were looking at what happens when something is over
learned during childhood.
It is not something that you have to sit and consciously
wrestle with.
Fascinating paper a few months ago from that same Josh Greene
who did that trolley car study.
And here what he did was people were playing some sort of game
where they had to predict an outcome
and they would get a reward if they predicted right.
And they set it up in some totally clever duplicitous way
so that there would be periods in the game
where the person had the option to cheat.
And they were able to tell by the rate at which they were
suddenly getting better answers if during these periods
suddenly they were being statistically significantly
more successful they were cheating.
And they had them in a brain scanner
and were able to see what was going on.
So you look at people who would cheat
and what happens when the signal comes
on indicating that it's one of these sessions where they could
get away with cheating.
Their frontal cortexes lit up like crazy.
What were they doing?
They were wrestling with Satan.
They were asking those neurons to do something or other down
in the amygdala before they did the wrong thing and the degree
of frontal activation was not particularly predictive of who
actually did cheat.
You fell into the cheater category
if they could show that you ever cheated during one of these.
And thus looking at you the rest of a time when
you had the opportunity and didn't, it wasn't particularly
good predictor of whether you cheated or not.
But it was a great predictor of people who were
willing to even cheat once.
So now look at the people who never ever cheated
and, of course, one prediction would
be that they have like frontal neurons
poking out of their head that are so big and energized
and their frontal cortex didn't move an inch.
When the possibility of cheating came up,
there wasn't the remotest change in frontal activation.
This was not them wrestling Satan to the ground.
It wasn't there.
There was no temptation.
It was an implicit pathway.
It was not sitting there saying, oh, what if everyone did this?
And, oh, it's important that we have laws.
And, oh, what if I get punished or-- it is simply,
before I knew it, I had jumped in.
I didn't even think about it.
What I think this suggests is awful lot of what
moral development is about in the formal stage world
is what kind of frontal cortex you're
going to wind up with reasoning with your amygdala
when you look at the dissociation
between moral reasoning and moral behavior
and the ones who do the truly brave things,
it's got nothing to do with the frontal cortex.
It's implicit by them.
So we will pick up on-- what day is it?
Wednesday.
Today's Wednesday?
 OK, let's get started.
We pick up with aggression, competition, et cetera.
And where have we gotten to?
We are now just about to leap to, instead
of early environment, early hormonal exposure,
parenatal-- hormones both pre, before and after birth.
Around that time, what do they have
to do with adult behavior in these realms?
So, again, this is tapping into that same concept from the sex
lectures-- organizational hormonal effects,
versus activational.
Organizational early in life, setting up the nervous system
to respond later on to some sort of activational hormonal
effect.
So the basic theme that's come through with animal studies
here has been built around, what if you
have females who are prenatally, or perinatally, androgenized,
exposed to high testosterone levels?
And what you see is, basically, the exact same thing
as from the sex lectures, which is
you get a powerful masculinization--
organizational masculinization effect so that later on these
are females who respond to even their low levels
of testosterone in the bloodstream
with increased levels of aggression,
more aggressive play, bunch of measures like that,
less maternal behavior when having offspring-- a pretty
clear literature in terms of prenatal masculinization
of aggressive behavior, as well as sexual behavior.
So, as usual, what about humans?
And we go back to our two diseases
from the other week one was that congenital adrenal hyperplasia
business, that tumor in the mother that produces
vast amounts of, among other things,
an androgen, a testosterone derivative,
which androgenizes the fetus.
Or the case with that drug DES, diethylstilbestrol,
where some women in the '50s took them
for preventing miscarriage, in some cases
had androgenic effect.
Back to the same issue as with the sex
lectures, so what's the behavior of these individuals like?
And, again, people were over that one.
People were really interested in this.
Both of them kind of burst on the scene,
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, and the DES babies,
around the same time lots of people started
studying these kids as they started growing up with a very
simple question here of, are they
going to be more aggressive than typical girls?
And, ultimately, will they be more aggressive women?
And somewhere between the lines, they're
also asking the question, are they
going to be more aggressive than is normal for a typical girl?
So what began to come out of these studies?
First off, some interesting, odd, quirky things-- one
is when you androgenize a female fetus
human, later on as a child she will
have a higher than average IQ.
Whoa, that's kind of interesting.
Stay tuned, it turns out that's not at all interesting.
OK, so that was observed.
Another thing, more of a tendency
towards being left-handed, better spatial skills.
And both of those are attributes that
are more common among males than females.
What else?
That's all that sort of stuff having
to do with ancillary issues.
But now, finally, people were then really focusing
in on the issues of aggression.
And by the time these girls were, I don't know,
10, 12 years old or so, the findings were absolutely clear.
These kids were way, way more aggressive than normal.
How do you know?
Because they were less interested in playing
with dolls than normal girls, because they expressed
less interest in marriage, because they
expressed more interest in having a career some day.
So these were, obviously, over the top, rabid, psychopathic,
androgenized, females because they weren't normal.
They weren't interested in dolls, or marriage,
and were interested in a career.
This was in every textbook starting in the late '60s,
and was still there in textbooks by the mid '80s or so,
endocrinology textbooks.
And somewhere in the early '70s or so,
probably some male endocrinologists kind of
discovered that, you know, wanting
a career if you're female does not count as aggression.
Actually, they came up with an even better term-- assertive
dominance.
How's that for a term that just summarizes an entire worldview
of gender differences?
OK, so some male endocrinologist finally figured that out.
Or maybe actually they're finally
started being some female endocrinologists who
pointed out this was gibberish.
The entire literature went down the tubes,
had to be started all over.
Oh, wanting a career is not being assertively, dominantly
aggressive if you're female.
So back to stage one on that whole literature, lots of work
since then.
What the literature has generally shown
is the left-handedness is there.
The spatial issue seem to remain.
The higher IQ is there.
What's up with that?
All that's known is as an explanation,
you find an equivalently higher IQ in the parents.
So it's got nothing to do with the androgenization.
There's some sort of selection going on, perhaps
who winds up being in a study like this-- sort of more
educated families.
Who knows what.
But that one turned out to be a red herring.
What about aggression?
Because now there's been populations
of androgenized girls who are now well into adulthood.
What about antisocial behavior?
What about all those sorts of things?
And, in general, what is shown is there's not much going on.
The literature has been pretty ambiguous
in terms of any sort of trends there of different behaviors,
different attitudes, different motivations, et cetera,
in these folks as they grow up.
But suppose what you found was, as adults,
women who had been androgenized as fetuses were now
17 times more likely to start brawls in bar rooms,
to snipe at people from the tops of water
towers, things of that sort.
What would you conclude?
Oh, prenatal testosterone makes you more
aggressive as an adult-- no.
Same confound with these folks as from the sex
lectures the other week, which is these girls were not just
born having been exposed to lots of testosterone in utero,
and doing something or other to their brain.
They were born with, basically, a hermaphroditic profile
of genitals that looked like males, or intersects,
sexually ambiguous genitals.
These were the kids who went through a dozen rounds
of reconstructive surgery in their first half dozen years
of life, their first 10 years of life, in this part of the body
that everyone is interested in, but doesn't quite talk about.
And what's up with that?
Why aren't I normal?
And these, once again, were not girls
who grew up with the only thing being different
about them their prenatal hormone exposure.
Basically makes the whole literature uninterpretable.
So what else in terms of prenatal hormone effects?
Another literature that people have
looked at, which in principle could be extremely
informative, looking at dizygotic twins,
non-identical twins.
So you were a girl.
You're a dizygotic twin.
And you could have a sibling who is either
a sister or a brother.
In other words, you may have spent your time in utero
with your sibling who either did or did not
secrete a certain amount of testosterone during that time.
Do you see any sort of masculinization
of aspects of aggressive behavior
in girls who are dizygotic twins with a male sibling
rather than a female one?
And what you wind up seeing is these kids show,
on the average, more aggressive play in childhood,
more-- here's the jargony term-- more rough
and tumble play, more interest in cars, mechanical things
like that, less interest in stuffed animals, in dolls--
small effect, very small effect.
Nonetheless, it suggests that this is another realm where
a little bit of prenatal exposure to testosterone
will change the behavioral profile.
Except there's a confound in these studies, which
is if you were a girl and you have an identical twin who
is a boy, you are in the Guinness Book of Records.
OK, let's start that one.
If you are a girl and you have a non-identical twin--
that's how it works, OK.
I knew I should have checked the notes before coming.
So you've got a non-identical twin who is a boy.
Not only do you spend your prenatal environment
being awash in some of his dribbling hormones,
but you grow up with him.
And girls who grow up with boys as brothers-- as
opposed to plants as brothers.
Whoa, what is happening here?
OK, being a girl growing up with brother brothers increases
the likelihood of rough and tumble play, because that's
what you do with your brother-- once again,
uninterpretable literature.
Generally, what you see is very, very clear
cut androgenization of aggressive behavior prenatal
testosterone when you're looking at rodents.
By the time you're looking at primates, some pretty strong
patterns but nowhere near as dramatic as in rodent
species looked at.
By the time you look at humans, maybe just some hints,
but that at the most.
Of the most interesting realms, literatures,
where people have been thinking about prenatal testosterone
exposure is work of a guy in the UK
at Oxford named Simon Baron-Cohen.
And what he is, is basically the world's expert on autism.
And he has developed what is called the hyper male
hypothesis of autism.
For starters, there's a very, very big gender skew
in autism-- far more frequent among boys than girls,
among males than females.
And what Baron-Cohen has done a lot of work on over the years
is first looking at a whole array
of sex differences between normal human males and females.
Sex differences, some of it's the finger ratio stuff.
Some of it is neural anatomy, some
of those structural differences in the brain,
having to do with that.
Some of it is functional spatial skills versus language skills.
Some of it is problem solving.
And there is a gender difference that
tends to come through with that on the average in that boys,
males, men, take more analytical approaches
to social problem solving.
Girls, women, females, take more empathic ones.
So that's a difference.
OK, so he studied all sorts of stuff
like that, and obviously with hormones as well--
all sorts of really subtle interesting physical
differences, whole array of these.
And what he has shown is that individuals with autism,
regardless of their sex, tend to have
even more exaggerated versions of
those male typical profiles-- the finger length,
the analytical focus at the cost of social empathy,
social affiliation, the very strong spatial skills,
whole bunch of those.
So he's made a fairly convincing argument,
I think, that is good.
Something's going on in terms of prenatal androgenization,
perhaps, which produces a more masculinized profile, which
taken to its extreme winds up being autism.
In other words, normal male behavior
is just skating on thin ice before going
into this whole realm of sort of dysfunctional socialization.
Lots of stuff with that, as we'll
see next week some very interesting differences
in the wiring of the cortex of people with autism.
And males show that same thing, just not as extreme.
OK, interesting footnote thing-- Simon Baron-Cohen
is apparently the cousin of Sasha Baron-Cohen of Borat,
which suggests that must be one interesting family when they
get together for the holidays.
OK, moving back one more box, however-- no,
I'm not going to do that.
OK, moving back one more box.
Now, instead of perinatal hormone stuff,
early environment, what about genes?
What about genes?
What do genes have to do with aggression, competition,
cooperation, empathy, et cetera?
It used to be not that long ago if you even raised
the possibility that there were genetic elements to aggression,
you would be hounded out of certain realms
of social science.
It was viewed as wildly incorrect, wildly offensive,
hidden agendas out the wazoo.
For some reason, this began to pass in the early '90s or so.
There were studies in the mid '80s, conferences
in the mid '80s, where there were protests.
They were picketed, because in this meeting that
was considering the sociology of aggression,
the this of aggression, the biology,
the genetics, the inclusion of it,
was the grounds for the picketing.
A number of those were canceled by the National Institutes
of Health under public pressure of certain interest groups, all
of that.
It used to be viewed as outrageously offensive,
the notion that genes have anything to do with aggression.
So there's two ways of showing that that's wrong.
The first is to sit somebody down
and make them go through the last 15 lectures in this class.
Or the other is to reflect on the fact
that you would leave a three-year-old
in the care of a basset hound, but not with a pit bull.
Oh, there are breed-specific differences in behavior.
That, if nothing else, is a demonstration of it,
that dog breeds have been bred for 20,000 years or so
to differ in levels of aggression,
in levels of affiliation, all of that.
People who for some bizarre reason follow bullfighting,
there are lines of bulls, different ranches of Spain
in Mexico, where they have been famous
for centuries for the particular fighting style of the bulls
that they breed.
Genes have something to do with it.
Of course they do, because hormones
have something to do with it.
And because receptors, and because enzymes,
and everything with that, it is impossible to have talked
about any of this stuff on the far right of the chart
without invoking genes-- a ludicrous view.
So what is known about the relevance of genes
to aspects of aggressive behavior?
First off, at this stage, there's
been a whole bunch of studies-- many of them winding up
in some very visible journals-- where people find
a gene implicating it in abnormal levels of aggression,
one of those sorts of behaviors.
Typical strategy-- these might be genetically engineered
animals to remove that gene.
Or there might be a spontaneous mutation.
And all of these report that these
are animals with a whole bunch of these mutations,
that these are animals with abnormally
high levels of aggression.
That's kind of a clean experiment.
If you go in-- and thanks to a mutation, or chopping out
one particular gene, and now you've
got a lot more aggression in that individual.
That kind of suggests that that gene
has something to do with aggression, perhaps
a whole lot.
What are all the problems with that?
Other ways that that gene could be
affecting behavior, which indirectly winds up
getting to aggression.
One possibility-- what if that's a gene that
is relevant to impulsivity?
And this is an individual who, if you
gave the mouse a different realm of tests,
would be shouting its love to the world at an impusively
high rate, just as it's being aggressive
at an impulsively high rate.
Maybe it's a gene having to do with impulsivity.
Maybe it's a gene having to do with one of the things
we heard in the last lecture.
What are the environmental releasing stimuli
that cause aggression to occur?
What's one of the most reliable ones?
Pain.
Oh, it turned out a number of these strains
of mice that were identified with a gene knock-out.
That here's a gene which can cause aggression.
It turned out that these were genes
that made animals that were much more sensitive to pain.
And they were more likely in a pain state
to displace aggression on to something else.
Or, as was shown in some of these,
these were animals who were more aggressive.
But they were also more affiliative.
And they were more everything.
Their generic level of arousal was a lot higher.
So all these caveats, an awful lot of the genes
that popped up in the first generation of those sorts
of studies that looked solid, that were replicated,
a lot of them instead had to do with indirect routes,
rather than directly with aggression itself.
So what about the genes that have held up?
And in the really plausible candidate ones,
we've covered some of these are already--
the serotonin synthesis genes, and the serotonin receptor
genes, and the dopamine receptor genes.
All of those have been very solidly implicated, really
careful research, the molecular biologists teaming up
with behaviorists knew what they were
doing-- a genetic component.
And what you know by now that is absolutely about
is this figure again.
That's the case with all of these genes.
Oh my God, it's not genes causing aggression.
We know exactly this one, modulation,
all that stuff, again depending on the environment.
And the environment in the realm of genes
relevant to aggression, the environment
is overwhelmingly about abuse and stress early in life.
So that's about as far as genes will get you there,
which is plenty good, because this
is exactly how the genes should be relevant to behavior.
This is how all genes are relevant to behavior.
Remember our ultimate punchline from the behavior of genetics--
at the end of the day, it actually
doesn't make any sense to ever say what any gene does,
only what it does in the following
range of environments.
In terms of that, what you are beginning to find
is this still sort of growing field which
is beginning to look at differences in these genotypes,
these different versions of these genes,
in different populations, in different cultures.
And that's just beginning as a literature.
I'm not impressed enough with the findings
yet that it's worth passing them on.
But that is going to be a very interesting field.
Finally, there's always this puzzle with any of these of,
oh, you've got some gene that's predisposing you
towards being aggressive if you were abused in childhood.
We still know nothing in terms of that gene.
That gene has got no predictive power
as to whether this will thus be someone who grows up and is
a sociopathic murderer.
Or if this is someone who grows up and is just an unbelievably
nasty Monopoly player.
That factor, again, that same deal-- oh,
major frontal cortical damage, disinhibition.
You can't regulate your behavior.
No science in terms of the neurobiology as to why
one turns into a serial murder, and the other one who
doesn't catch clues that the family wants to eat dinner.
Again, it's the same puzzle over and over.
And, again, you could begin to guess what the differences are
going to be.
Problems in some of these realms with these aggressive genes,
and different upbringings, different stabilities
and families, different relationships, different role
models, you can be off and running with that one.
One final domain in genes and aggression--
and only a handful of you the other lecture
knew who that guy Charles Whitman
was, who was the guy who climbed up
the Texas tower, all of that.
OK, so here's another chance to score points
in the mass murderer realm.
How many people have ever heard of a guy named Richard Speck?
Wow, very few-- no hands.
OK.
No, that's a bottle going up, not a hand.
Richard Speck was once one of the most notorious people
in America.
Richard Speck was a nightmare sociopath
who in 1968 committed a crime that just
stunned the entire country.
People wrote songs about it.
It was just as brutal as one could imagine.
He broke into the apartment of eight nurses
living in Chicago, eight student nurses,
and slaughtered them all.
And this was shocking on a level that's hard to describe.
Richard Speck was the nightmare sociopathic murderer.
So he gets sent off to prison eventually for life.
And in the process at some point or other,
he's getting some physical exam.
Somebody takes a blood sample something.
And a lab technician notices something
interesting in his blood, examining
the chareotypes, the structures, of his chromosomes.
And they discovered that he had an extremely rare
chromosomal abnormality.
Females, XX, males, XY-- every now
and then you get somebody where something screws up.
And what you now get is XYY.
You get an extra Y chromosome.
And, suddenly, this had to be the explanation
for what was going on.
Males are a total pain in the ass all over the world.
And they've got those Y chromosomes.
Oh my God.
The guy has two Y chromosomes in every single cell.
This explains it.
And this suddenly started this hysteria
about violence and the XYY male.
Senators were bellowing in Congress
about how we needed to screen our schoolteachers to make
sure none of the men had XYY profiles.
The military was all set to start testing recruits for XYY.
Although it's not clear if that would get you in or would
that get you out, how that one worked.
But they were suddenly interested.
Tons of work went into it, this flurry
of excitement, special funding.
We need to be on top of this.
And by the early '70s, what was clear was
there was no relationship whatsoever.
So that one went down the tubes.
And then one of those ironic ending departments,
it was eventually discovered that a lab technician had
blown, had done the chareotyping wrong.
And he really wasn't an XYY male,
despite that lab technician then having called up
the newspapers.
He was a normal XY sociopathic male.
So that one was up there for a while,
more realms of don't overvalue the genetic evidence.
So that shifts us now one step further back.
And now begin to look at whole populations--
whole populations not yet on the genetic evolutionary level.
But what do things like ecology have
to do with levels of aggression?
What does culture have to do with it?
What does factors like that?
And there's a really interesting array of findings out there.
First off, one important dichotomy
when looking at traditional human cultures
is how people make their living.
And the one that's pertinent here
is the dichotomy between pastoralist people
and everybody else.
Pastoralist people, nomadic pastoralists people, these
are cow people.
These are people who wander around with their goats,
or their camels.
These are the shepherds, in contrast
to traditional agriculturalists, or far rarer
traditional hunter-gatherers-- so nomadic pastoralists
versus everyone else.
And what a boatload of anthropology has shown
is nomadic pastoralists have higher rates of violence
both within group and between group.
Nomadic pastoralists are vastly more likely than other groups
to have standing armies, warrior classes,
to have leadership be derived from people
who have had the most success as a warrior,
to have myths built around their religion that success in war,
violent acclaim in war, is your gateway to heaven,
or whatever afterlife is viewed as most desirable.
This is a consistent finding.
Lots and lots of these cultures, nomadic pastoralists
are the ones who came up with warfare on a certain level,
and warrior classes.
And this makes perfect sense, because one feature
of being a nomadic pastoralist is you're nomadic.
At certain times of the year, there's
one subset of the whole village who's off 15 miles
away where there's some good grazing.
Another group is on the other side.
And what this sets you up for is something that farmers never
have to worry about.
Somebody can't come and rustle your farm away at night.
But people can come and steal all your animals.
Warrior classes, so that at any given point,
if people are dispersed, there is still a designated age group
of individuals who are out there to defend the collective herds
of the group.
So you see that.
In the United States, where that has had
an interesting manifestation is where
people settled in the original 13 colonies,
from which part of the United Kingdom.
And some very influential studies, really interesting
creative ones, pointing out that the American South
was disproportionately settled by sheep people
from the northern ends of the British Isles--
in other words, nomadic pastoralists.
Shifting to another realm of anthropological designation,
these are people who disproportionately have
come from cultures of honor.
Cultures of honor, where people are
willing to kill over very symbolic slights rather
than over material conflicts, where there
are vendettas within the group, there
are vendettas between groups, where
it is honorific to have to avenge
a death, which you do not necessarily
find in agriculturalists.
Cultures of honor, and that goes hand-in-hand
with nomadic pastoralism.
And what you get there, typically,
are very clear rules about enforced hospitality
for guests, and very clear rules of the circumstances
of aggression, retributive ones, over symbolic affronts.
And that's really clear difference regionally
in this country.
Interesting sociologist, University of Michigan,
named Richard Nesbett.
And he grew up in the South.
And I actually heard him once give a talk
where he talks about how when he was about 18 or so,
he left the South for the first time
and joined this very strange culture at Harvard
University as an undergraduate.
And he was dumbfounded by how different of a world this was.
People didn't shoot relatives at picnics,
at barbecues, which sounded totally facetious.
But when you look at the higher crime
rates in the American South, it is not
occurring in urban areas.
Urban crime is roughly equivalent
all throughout the United States.
It is not due to higher rates of what
they call 7-Eleven robberies, which is just material
gain, a robbery of that sort.
It is murders of honor.
It is people who know each other at social settings,
people who have some insult, have something that has nothing
to do with material wealth.
This is where the disproportionate violence comes
from in the American South.
And prompted by that, Nesbett did
one of the all-time interesting studies, this famous, amazing
study.
So he's at the University of Michigan.
And he recruits student volunteers
who believe they're going in to do a hopscotch test,
or some such thing.
And they're going in.
But he made a point of finding out where everyone came from.
And he got a fairly even distribution
between the relatively few students in Michigan
from the American South, and then students
from the more traditional North.
So we get into the psych building, each individual who's
coming for their appointment.
And they take the elevator.
And they come out.
And they walk down the hall.
And this is where the experiment happens.
Nesbett has somebody working on the project--
a confederate on the project, I say making a lame pun, OK.
So a confederate on the project, a person
working on the project.
And this was a big, beefy guy.
And the whole idea was that this big, beefy guy
was going to do something insulting
to this individual walking down the hallway, all male.
Here's what they did.
They clearly did a lot of thinking
in designing this study, in terms of what single word
this person was going to say.
And this is what he wound up saying.
The volunteer would be walking down the hall.
Here comes this big, beefy guy moving fast.
And as he comes by him, bumps into him with his shoulder,
walks past, and says, watch it, asshole, and then disappears.
Volunteer comes in to start their study,
and quickly they look at blood pressure, and heart rate,
and stress hormone levels, and testosterone levels,
and get a typical participant in this study from the North.
And they come in.
And they're a little bit irritated, and what a jerk,
and all of that.
And it's all over with two minutes later.
Get people from the American South,
on the average massive stress response, hypertension,
elevated testosterone levels, big regional differences.
These are some of the physiological pictures
of cultures of honor.
What else?
What other interesting things about ecosystems, or ecology,
or cultural aspects?
Another dichotomy that is really consistent-- and this one
maps pretty readily on that pastoralist versus everybody
else-- the sorts of cultures and the level of violence
that are generated in cultures that live
in deserts versus rain forests.
And, once again, deserts are where
you are far more likely to find nomadic pastoralists, rain
forests, hunter-gatherers, mixture of hunter-gatherers,
small farm agriculturists-- two totally different worlds
of occupations.
And what you see is far higher rates
of violence within group and between groups
in desert dwellers.
And that maps very logically onto pastoralists
versus everybody else.
Desert dwellers, open savanna grasslands,
that's where you see the warrior classes.
That's where you see raiding of other tribes.
That's where you get that pattern, virtually none
among the hunter-gatherers.
I might point out something which
will become sort of focused on more in a lecture in about
a week or so.
I should point out that desert dweller nomadic pastoralists
are also the cultures on this planet that
invented monotheism.
Consistent difference-- desert dwellers
tend more towards monotheism.
And it was invented by desert nomadic pastoralists.
Rainforest cultures far disproportionately
tend to be polytheistic.
And this is not remotely surprising.
If you're living in a rainforest and there's
10,000 different types of edible plants around there,
it doesn't take a lot of work to come up with the notion
that there's lots of different spirits and gods out there.
What the desert it is about is one, singular baked truth there
of surviving.
That's where monotheism was born.
Monotheism, historically, is more
associated with cultures that invented warfare, and invented
warrior classes, and raiding, and things of that sort.
That's kind of interesting.
OK, moving on, more cultural differences-- one of the great,
great predictors of having a society with lots of violence
in it, and lots of warfare elsewhere,
is a culture that has rots of cultural myths
of victimization.
We have been screwed historically, because of this,
this, and this, and coupled with that an ethos of not
turning the other cheek, but instead of retribution.
Cultures that have strong histories
and or myths of victimization, and strong values
built around retribution are extremely violent societies,
and often really bad news as neighbors.
What else?
Amazing study that got published about a year ago,
which is on the recommended reading list.
This is not required.
But this was a deeply interesting study.
It
Was one of those game theory studies.
It was a game a little bit like prisoner's
dilemma-- not exactly the same, but the same sort of notions
that you could be very generous in your game playing style.
You could be absolutely rationally fair.
You could be exploited, a whole range of possibilities.
What these guys did in this study
was take scads of people from 40 different countries.
No they didn't, from 16, 19, they
took from a bunch of different countries.
And just to control for things, all of the subjects
were university students.
So you're selecting for a fairly homogeneous bunch,
both within group and across these different countries.
And what they did was they had people play these games.
And they had the option for what is called altruistic punishing,
which we will hear more about in a little while, which is you
have the option to expend some of your resources--
your points, your chips, whatever--
you can spend to punish the other individual for cheating.
And the question, of course, becomes,
how much are you willing to spend to punish somebody
when they've been cheating against you,
when they've been stingy, when they haven't reciprocated,
all of that?
First finding, which is everybody
across all the countries averaged out
to the same rate, the percentage of resources
that someone is willing to expend
on punishing a cheater-- so no particular cultural differences
there.
But then they identified another interesting realm
of game behavior here, which they called antisocial
punishment, which is where it's not
that you are expending some of your resources to punish
somebody for having cheated.
It's where you're expending resources
to punish someone for having been overly generous.
And that pops up in certain sorts of games.
It is not terribly common when it's
the person who is choosing with their opponent.
But when you have a third party, you
have no cultural differences at the rate at which they
are willing to punish cheaters.
But here's where the differences came
then, the rate at which people would punish
unexpectedly generous players.
And you got a big spread.
The lowest rate at which this happened
was, nicely, as it turned out, people
from this country, which is kind of nice, people from England.
And, of course, who else?
The ever-useful Scandinavians with their powerhouses
of the cells and their other cliches all set.
So the Scandinavians come through yet again.
But, for once, we're able to hang out with them
and actually count as having a good profile--
the lowest rates of people being willing to do
this nutso anti-social punishing in those countries.
In between rates-- a number of Middle Eastern countries,
a large number of Eastern Bloc countries, in other words
Slavic ones that used to be part of the Soviet Union, Korea,
and turkey.
Those were the middle ones.
Which ones had the worst rates?
I will just read the two countries here
that were way up there, a big gap between them
and the rest of the countries.
One was Greece.
And the other were the Arabic Emirates on the Saudi Arabian
Peninsula, where people are willing to spend more
to do anti-social punishing than they
are willing to spend to punish cheaters,
extraordinary finding.
People from Muscat, which was where the university was,
those students were more willing to punish someone
for being unexpectedly generous than for somebody
cheating on a game theory social contract-- totally amazing.
So what's that about?
When they actually question people,
you see things with people from there
along the lines of, if people start
doing that, of being all generous like that,
it's just going to up the ante for everybody.
Everybody's going to have to start doing that.
That's an interesting piece of reasoning.
But when you look at a larger level, what these researchers
then showed was a predictor across all
these different societies of the rate
of this anti-social punishment levels of trust in the society.
Some standard metrics used by sociologists
who were interested in this concept of social capital--
how much social trust there is in the society, how
much participation there is, how much of a sense of efficacy.
And what you see is the lower the levels
of social capital in these societies,
the higher the rates of this anti-social punishment, totally
interesting study.
Next in the realm of culture, what
are people doing these days, what
is sort of the science and the research these days,
trying to make sense of terrorism,
and the sort of cultures that give rise to them,
and the sort of ideologies that give rise to them?
A number of basic dichotomies-- one
is a camp that views it as always
abnormal sociopathic behavior.
Another is a camp that just views terrorism
as extremes of ideology.
The first one is much more about individual dysfunction--
oh, this is a neuropsychiatric problem, perhaps.
The second one is one more a feature
of cultures that have extremely strong ideologies.
So that's one division in there as to how to think
about it in the community.
Another division is really interesting.
And it's one my reading of this literature
that has totally thrown people in the field for a loop.
Forever, there has been a profile,
a demographic and psychological profile,
of individuals who are terrorists,
all the way back to the people who did the Boston Tea
Party in this country, the IRA.
All sorts of stuff like that, the Haganah, which
was in Israel, terrorist acts before independence,
studied in a whole bunch of these
that there tends to be a rather consistent profile
of these individuals who would be terrorists.
Young, male, socially isolated, socially unaffiliated in terms
of relationships, relatively uneducated background,
history of childhood abuse, and another factor which has just
completely slipped my mind.
What was it?
Oh you all know.
OK, so that's exactly what you find in these folks--
a picture of isolated sociopathic individuals
who already have a history of anti-social behavior.
These are people who, if they hadn't stumbled
into this cause, would be spending
their time mugging old ladies.
That would be that profile.
And you look at these various groups.
And that has been a consistent one.
Terrorism in the recent years, particularly Middle Eastern
fundamentalist, is a completely different profile.
It is not young men.
It tends to be educated, well-off people
in their thirties and forties, overwhelmingly middle class
or upper class backgrounds.
Next, it's not just middle-aged males.
It's females.
It's women to a much higher extent than seen
in any previous sort of population
dealing with terrorism.
Next what you see is these are individuals
who, on the average, tend not to have
had any direct exposure to the suppression
that they are fighting against.
As opposed to the sociopathic model, a classic picture
with IRA gunman, the father was taken away by the whoevers,
shot, never came back again.
And they were passed on the family mantle.
The current picture is a very different oe--
no direct experience of the persecution.
Finally, tending not to have particularly high levels
of religiosity, and this is this very contemporary profile
where you get these 40-year-old engineers who are suicide
bombers, where they go home.
They say goodbye to their families.
They make a video tape sort of wishing everybody well.
And after having quit their job and paying the rent one
extra month, and off they go and blow themselves up.
People, I sense, in the field haven't a clue
how to make sense of what this is about, very new,
challenging feature.
One interpretation, one is of a school
pushed by people like Phil Zimbardo
here in the psychology department, incredibly
influential psychologist, who as a general theme over the years
has argued for the stance that under the right circumstances,
under the right coercive circumstances,
virtually anybody could do anything that is appalling.
Zimbardo, who did the famed Stanford prison study.
The other view is, OK, this isn't a lesson
that anybody could wind up being this violent if, look at them.
They're an engineer.
And they've got a master's degree, and all of that.
Instead, it is simply an outcome of a lot of what terrorism
is about these days, a very novel world
of international terrorism.
Rather than within country, suddenly you
have a world of people who need to be able to do things
like get passports, and fly elsewhere, and be
able to navigate customs, and things of that sort.
It is suddenly selecting for a more sophisticated population
of individuals.
You know, the jury's out on all of this.
But this seems to be a very challenging thing
for that field.
OK, so now this allows us to push one step further back.
I'm going to skip over a few things there.
Now, insofar as we are looking at culture,
and insofar as we have looked at anthropological differences,
and insofar as we have looked at anything having
to do with genes, we now have to talk about evolution,
because that's where the genes came from, of course.
So in first pass, it's absolutely simple
to understand what evolution has to do with aggression, which
is evolution selects for higher and higher levels of aggression
because that's what you need to succeed.
Unless you grew up watching certain types of television
programs, in which case evolution selects
for no aggression occurring because animals
behave for the good of the species.
So sorting through that, beginning now
to apply some of our foundations from that world,
individual selection, kin selection, reciprocal altruism,
and the modern version of group selection.
So where do these play out?
First, how do these play out in terms
of increasing the likelihood of aggression and antisocial
behavior?
Individual selection, males, that is absolutely simple.
In every culture on this planet, and in the vast majority
of social species that have been looked at,
the majority, the major cause of aggression
in that society or species is male male violence
over reproductive access to females.
That is close to a universal.
That is the most common form motivator
of violence on this planet, humans and otherwise.
So that one's easy to come up with,
in terms of obvious stuff.
One classic study, insanely controversial one,
that appeared to be the landmark demonstration of some
of the same in humans-- traditional tribe,
hunter-gatherer down in Venezuela in the Amazon
called the Yanomamo who have been
the darlings of high testosterone male
anthropologists for decades.
These have been intensely studied people, many decades
now, predominantly by an anthropologist named
Napoleon Chagnon, who is now emeritus at Santa Barbara.
But he has been a major figure in anthropology
for a long time.
And these people are insanely aggressive, incredibly high
rates of violence between groups, within groups.
Sufficiently so that the written monographs
of the Yanamamo, with titles like Yanamamo,
the fierce people, things of that sort.
And about 15 years ago, Chagnon published a paper
in Science using decade's worth of data
showing that the more people, particular men in this society,
in this tribe, the more people you have killed on the average,
the higher your reproductive success
That's it.
That's it.
That's everything right there.
That's Darwin all over the place.
Just play it out over time.
And this is dramatic selection in a traditional human society,
the reproductive rewards of violence and murder.
Very major, influential study, picked up
by all the newspapers.
And it has been completely mired in controversy
ever since, all sorts of ethical attacks on Chagnon,
most of which that have not stuck,
but some really, really telling dissections of the work,
ripping it apart on statistical grounds.
I don't think it's actually for real.
But that as easily interpreted within that framework.
Then more realms of violence, individual selection,
orangutans raping each, rape in other species,
rape among humans, which of course brings up
the question of whether rape is more about passing
on copies of your genes, or more about power and subjugation.
And the overwhelming sense in the field
is it's about the latter.
It does not have a whole lot to do with a world
where you have to start counting numbers of copies of genes,
and thinking about adaptiveness of strategies.
Next, individual selection, explaining another realm
of violence-- in most cultures, and in an awful lot
of species looked at, the second leading cause of violence
is males attacking females over denial of sexual access.
And this is amazingly common all over the place,
the second leading cause of violence
on this planet across humans and different cultures,
and obvious easy individual selection explanation there.
Finally, another realm individual selection,
the world of female female competition,
and infanticide, competitive infanticide.
We know how to run all of those.
So lots of reasons within the framework
of individual selection to see where you are
increasing rates of aggression.
Next, kin selection-- you're going to know that one as well.
Two brothers or eight cousins, and that whole strategy,
and that's why related individuals
cooperate with each other in circumstances of aggression.
Chimpanzees-- chimps are function
where females are the ones who pick up at puberty
and go elsewhere.
So all of the adult males in a chimp group
are brothers, first cousins, things of that sort.
And, thus, you get one of the outcomes
of that, high levels of male male cooperation.
And as we heard, that has been reported by Goodall and others
to result in things that look absolutely
like organized warfare and genocide,
eradicating all the males in a group in the next valley
over, purely along kinship lines.
What else?
Other primates, old world primates, monkeys like baboons,
aggression is very much between lineages than within,
same exact kin selection sort of arguments.
So what happens when you get to humans?
Things get more complicated, of course.
The first one being that a relative, relatives,
is a relative term, in that it is a sliding scale.
Wonderful quote to that effect, a Bedouin quote,
which is, it's my brothers, my cousins, and I
against the world.
And it's my brothers and I against my cousins.
As in, who counts as an us, and who counts as a
them is a sliding measure.
It is a relative measure.
What you see is by the time you get
to humans capacity for very rapid shifts of us/them
along the lines of relatedness.
Now, one of the readings, which I can't remember now
if I actually did stick into an assignment,
but one of the readings looks at the classic social biological
interpretation of making sense of aggression
along the lines of kin selection.
What do you make of child abuse?
What do you make of homicidal parents, damaging parents?
How do you make sense of that in a, are you out of your mind?
This is copies of your genes there, the challenges to that.
And this is a couple, Daley and Wilson, University of Toronto,
I think, who have for decades been working
in this area showing things like a child is
more likely to be abused by a stepfather
than a biological father.
Wonder what that's about?
Kin selection, that's easy.
A child is more likely to be abused
by a paternal grandparent than a maternal one.
Kin selection explanation-- more certainty of paternity
when something is going through a female line.
So they've been all these studies
showing that degree of relatedness
explains a fair amount of the variability in patterns
of violence within families.
Problems with it-- two problems, one
is there's been a lot of failure of replications
in other societies.
The Scandinavians, for example, don't see that pattern
when they study it.
The other is there's alternative models.
There's economic models, for example.
When times get tough in terms of displacement,
family violence increases.
Families with stepfathers, on the average,
are under more economic duress than families
with biological fathers, greater likelihood of violence there.
It is a very uncontrolled literature.
That is sort of viewed as in the classic,
and in other people's view, the most ideologically most extreme
way in which social biologists think about something as
bizarre and challenging as close relatives killing each other.
One final realm, which is in terms of this us/them stuff,
the point here being, how do you decide who is an us and them?
And suddenly, we're in our world of ethology.
Do we make some us/them dichotomies more easily
than others?
Do we have prepared learning to see
some differences as more salient than others in us/thems?
That remains an immensely controversial subject
in terms of what are the natural categories that young kids
divide people up by?
Are kids colorblind in terms of skin color?
Are kids blind in terms of body types,
in terms of some such things?
Lots of work in this area, how unnatural
are some of the us/them dichotomies
that we tend to come up with?
Stay tuned about 20 minutes, and you will see not very natural
at all.
As soon as you get to humans, all this social biology
stuff with kin selection is interesting, but as
soon as you get to humans you get to something vastly more
interesting and important.
Back to our recognizing relatives realm--
the business of how we interact not with our relatives,
but with people who we feel as close to as if they
are relatives-- pseudo kinship.
And what you see in culture after culture
is brilliant manipulative skills on the part of powers that
be to make some non-relatives feel more related to each other
than they actually are.
What's this about?
This is military indoctrination.
The whole point, or one of the main points,
of military training early on is to get
people to become a band of brothers,
a band of pseudo kinshipped relatives,
to increase the cooperativity later on,
to increase the odds that you are
willing to give up your life for the person next to you.
Culture after culture is great at doing this.
Warrior cultures-- for example, the Maasai in East Africa,
they have a warrior stage when you're 15,
you go become a warrior, roughly 15.
And you stay that way for a decade.
And you protect the cows.
And you raid the neighbors.
And once you're 25, you become an elder
and get married then to a 13-year-old.
But what you've got there is the entire structure of warrior
life is built around pseudo kinship.
They live separately from everybody else.
They use kinship terms for each other.
For the rest of their lives, their wife
will refer to somebody from their warrior class
as her brother-in-law.
Warriors are not allowed to eat their own food.
They can only share their food with another warrior,
all built around generating pseudo kinship.
Other version, that other more industrialized version,
the Israeli Military, for example,
allows kids when they are signing up after high school
to join particular units as a group, a group of friends
from their high school, increasing the pseudo kinship
element there.
More of that-- something that was absolutely unprecedented
when you look at the difference between kinship and pseudo
kinship.
World War II, United States hugely heterogeneous country,
obviously, blah, blah, melting pot, all of that.
And World War II was sort of the peak of that picture.
And what you got in many, many fighting units
was something straight out of central casting
in these inspirational movies.
There's McCarthy from Boston, and Sapiola from Philadelphia,
and Kewalski from Chicago, and then the Southern guy,
and the Jewish guy from who knows where.
And they're all together.
And they're a fighting unit of American unity,
and all of that.
And what does that produce?
Something that was virtually unprecedented in warfare.
If you were an American soldier in World War II
and you were of German-American or German ancestry,
you would, on the average, almost certainly
share more genes in common with the people you were trying
to kill than the people you were willing to give up
your life for, as you had classically heterogeneous
troops on the American side-- completely unprecedented,
so this business of pseudo kinship.
Historically, Vietnam was apparently
a major failure of military pseudo kinship mechanisms,
in that something unprecedented was done there,
which was people were not kept in stable fighting units.
Instead, people were constantly shuttling in and out.
And you would get these nutty circumstances, apparently,
where you'd be there in the middle of the firefight.
And the person over here is some kid who showed up this morning.
And the guy here, if he survives this,
he's shipping out home to Hawaii tonight.
And who feels like a brother?
No one.
Vietnam had an unmatched degree of breaking of unity of troops.
Why was that done in Vietnam?
Something that kept happening.
As soon as they allowed units to remain more stable,
the rates at which soldiers were shooting their officers
would go way up.
So another, perhaps, version of cooperation.
Hand-in-hand with the pseudo kinship
is, of course, the flip side, pseudo speciation,
the mechanisms, the psychological, the propagandist
mechanisms that are available to make them seem as
different from you as possible.
Not just different sorts of people,
but pseudo speciation-- they are so different they hardly
even count as humans.
It doesn't count as much when you kill them.
And endless realms of that World War II propaganda
in the United States about various
ethnicities that we were fighting
against pseudo speciating, various genocides, the Rwandan
one.
The sort of call to arms there was kill the cockroaches,
kill the cockroaches, the Hutu tribes killing the Tutsis
there.
And this was pseudo speciation.
Let me give you an amazing example which
occurred in this country not all that long ago around 1990.
An astonishing piece of pseudo speciation
that happened in this country-- 1990, first Gulf War.
Kuwait was drilling oil from underneath the Iraq's land.
Iraq got pissed off, invaded them.
And, suddenly, we had the first Gulf War.
The United States goes in there to drive the Iraqis out
of Kuwait.
And ultimately has to make the decision
of whether to follow them into Iraq and overthrow
Saddam Hussein.
And that wasn't done.
But so this war going on.
Very early on, it was absolutely clear
where it was heading, which was that the diplomacy was failing.
And the United States was beginning
to pull together a coalition of various countries
that would be a unified force fighting against Iraq.
But it had not yet been authorized by US Congress
as an act of war.
Suddenly, into this came a woman,
a refugee from Kuwait City.
Refugee, she was a nurse who worked in a hospital there.
She had managed to get out of Kuwait
after the Iraqis had invaded.
And she came and testified in Congress
about an appalling thing that she had witnessed,
which was when the Iraqis came in and took over
their hospital, not only did they steal all the supplies.
They took the newborn infants out of the incubators
and left them out to die, and shipped the incubators back
to Iraq.
Everyone was flabbergasted by this.
This was every newspaper in the country, everybody
learned about this.
Everybody suddenly learned, my God, they leave babies out
to die.
These people hardly count as human.
And, critically, that war was authorized by Congress
by just a couple of votes of senators.
And at least a half dozen of them
cited this incident in helping them decide and this was
something that had to be done.
This was a deciding factor in us going to that war.
And the remarkable thing is, it never happened.
The nurse was not a nurse from Kuwait City.
She was the niece of the Kuwaiti ambassador
to the United States.
She had been trained by a public relations
firm paid for by the US government
to make up this story.
And she sat in our Congress on live TV
in front of the entire country, lied like crazy.
And we went into that war with a 92% approval rate-- one
gigantic piece of pseudo speciation.
My God, they leave babies out to die.
It will hardly count killing them.
They're hardly even human.
And the coverage of when it was revealed what was actually
going on with this person didn't come anywhere close
to front page in any newspaper in the country, buried down
in there.
Virtually the entire country came out of that incident
having learned how inhumane, those people
hardly count as human.
OK, five minute break.
Our principles of individual selection,
kin selection, reciprocal altruism,
begin to give us insight into circumstances where evolution
should select for more aggression,
for more warfare along those lines.
Now, the flip side-- what is it in the realms
of these basic building blocks of evolution
that will push for more cooperation, more empathy, more
affiliation, less violence?
Individual selection level-- we already
know some of these examples, which
is that whole world of alternative male strategies,
that whole world of sometimes if you're a male baboon,
you could pass on lots of copies of your genes
by fighting like mad and being high ranking.
And sometimes it's by bypassing all of that
and being the nice guy, having an affiliative relationship,
and female choice being the thing that
winds up increasing the number of copies of your genes.
So the possibilities of alternative mating strategies,
the possibilities of, of course, parental behavior,
and all we need to do there is switch over
to the world of South American pair bonding monkeys.
And those are not animals with particularly high rates
of aggression.
So all of those are circumstances
where that could potentially be perfectly genetically
viable alternatives to natural selection
selects for higher degrees of violence
because it passes on more copies of your genes.
OK, kin selection-- so we've just gone through kin selection
insofar as it can generate pseudo kinship
and make you a better, more murderous soldier
who is more willing to give up your life
for your band of brothers.
And conversely, pseudo speciation,
they hardly even count as humans.
The flip side, of course, ways in which the human capacity
for pseudo kinship can be used to decrease violence,
and to make things more peaceable, and to make people
feel more connected with each other.
This is a ritual in all sorts of societies
where you generate pseudo kinship
as a means of generating peace.
One example, traditional Bedouin society, here's what happens.
You have two groups who have been having tensions, who've
been fighting, who have been having some clan warfare,
whatever.
And they have now figured out a way
to have a treaty to stop fighting with each other.
Here is the ritual that is done, which
is a bunch of the old guys from each of the groups come.
And they sit down.
And they start exploring each other's genealogies.
Who is your great grandparents?
Who is your great, great, great, going through all of that.
And at some point, one of them has the job
of making up an imaginary relationship between the two
groups.
Chuck, are you kidding?
I had a great, great grandfather named Chuck also.
We're relatives.
A ritual absolutely transparent that people go through
there to generate a supposed rationale for relatedness,
a big ceremony of pseudo kinship.
Another one is seen in some aboriginal groups in Australia.
Apparently, this is a motif that pops up often
in aboriginal rock art.
And, apparently, it's a symbolic version of this phenomenon.
OK, you've got somebody wandering
through the great back of beyond there.
And there are very few sources of water.
There's a water hole up ahead.
You've just walked 10 miles to come to it.
And you suddenly notice a stranger
coming towards the water hole from the opposite direction.
And this is a water hole that is essential for you to survive.
You are not going to be able to walk far enough to get
to the next water hole.
Maybe what you should do, just in case
this person winds up being aggressive,
is you should attack him first-- a virtual guarantee
of aggression.
Here's a ritual that has been worked out instead
that bypasses it.
The two individuals sit down around the waterhole.
And each starts giving their genealogy.
I am the son of, who's the son of, who's the son of.
Into the next bar mitzvah, whatever.
Oh, we're relatives.
Let's share some water.
They don't fall for it for a second.
But it is a totally artificial mechanism of pseudo kinship
to make it possible for two strangers
to share this absolutely essential for life resource,
and not try to kill each other.
Same sort of thing, pseudo kinship
in all sorts of historical examples, of revolutions.
Revolutions generating pseudo kinship,
what is often the term people use for each other
after the revolution?
Sisters, brothers unite, pseudo kinship terms.
In French, for example, there is in the informal to tense.
And there's the more formal one.
And you're supposed to use the more formal run
sort of in the outside world.
And in the aftermath of the French Revolution,
it became illegal to address somebody, a stranger,
in the formal tense.
It always had to be with the familial
to tense there, pseudo kinship, more and more of it.
So this brings up what is initially
a really, really depressing set of studies, which turn out
to have a very nice optimistic resolution to them--
very disturbing work.
Work done by a number of labs over the years
most notably, Elizabeth Phelps, who is at NYU.
And this is work using functional brain imaging,
amygdala, all of that.
You put people in a brain scanner.
Actually you put one in.
And you put them in one at a time.
And what you do is you're flashing up pictures to them,
flashing up pictures of people, of faces,
of faces at a rapid speed.
So there's virtually no conscious processing.
This is all tapping into subliminal stuff.
And what she reported, and what has been replicated
by a number of other groups since then,
is that you get activation of the amygdala
on the average in people when you subliminally
flash up pictures of somebody of another race.
Whoa, shit, that is distressing to have been found.
That is not a good thing, because this
is totally rapid subliminal stuff, and replicated,
some of the best people in the field showing this.
My God, the amygdala has an us/them
that's, in effect, there in a quarter
second after seeing something.
This is hopeless.
We are so dichotomized.
This is a disaster.
In the years since then, much more interesting stuff
has emerged.
And this has predominately been research
by Susan Fiske at Princeton showing that it doesn't
necessarily work this way.
OK, here's what you do.
First version, you tell somebody,
I'm going to be flashing up pictures
of faces while you're lying there in the brain scanner.
And what you do is you force them
to look at the picture in a way where in a purely
mechanical visual viewing, you're going to say,
some of the pictures have a big red dot
right in the middle of it.
And any time one of those comes up,
I want you to press this button.
In other words, just process the picture
for just a visual pattern.
You do that.
And the amygdala doesn't activate
when you see a picture of somebody of another race.
OK, this is not very exciting.
Now, the next thing she would do--
get people to start thinking categorically.
Here's what you do.
She would now have people going in there saying,
I'm going to give you a bunch of pictures, flashing up pictures.
And what I want you to do is to stop.
I'm going to stop at some of them.
And I want you to look closely.
And tell me, do you think this person is older than age
30 or younger than age 30?
In other words, what you have just requested the person to do
is think of the face in the picture
as belonging to a category, rather than as an individual.
You're going to look at this picture now.
And you don't really need to care who the person is,
or what they look like, or anything.
All you need to do is think of them as part of a category.
And when you bias people like that,
and you flash up the picture of somebody from another race,
the amygdala gets even more activated.
You have primed somebody to think not about individuals,
but to make them think of people in categories.
Finally, what she shows is exactly the opposite.
Now what she does is prime something,
a totally neutral sort of priming,
to try to get people to think of the person in the picture
as an individual.
And she asks totally innocuous, neutral things
along the lines of, I want you to look at the picture.
I know this sounds silly.
But I want you to look at the picture.
And tell me, do you think is this the kind of person who
likes Coke or Pepsi?
Totally sort of diagonal orthogonal
to all of this stuff, get someone doing that.
And now the amygdala doesn't activate.
All you need to do in that study is subliminally prime someone
to think of someone who they're about to look
at as an individual, rather than as part of a category,
than as part of a group.
This is not rebuilding society so that we change our us/thems.
This is a minor prompt 30 seconds before somebody has
the pictures flashed at them.
That's all it took in these studies.
More good news emerged, which was that you would also
see separate of these sorts of manipulations,
long-term developmental aspects that were predictors
of this phenomenon.
People who grew up in racially and ethnically diverse
neighborhoods didn't have this amygdala effect.
People who had had a significant relationship
with a significant other of another race
did not have this amygdala reaction there.
So the easy solution to this being depressing--
OK, early childhood, exposure throughout life, that's great.
That's very good news.
But even more remarkable in her studies is just a prompt.
Prompt somebody to think of that person as an individual.
And your amygdala is not doing an us/them with them anymore.
Now, this whole business about if you grew up
in a diverse neighborhood, that taps into a whole field
called contact theory.
The notion that aggression is decreased,
affiliation is increased, if people have grown up
with lots of contact with people from other cultures,
other societies other religions, all of that,
or if people live in contact with it.
And, in general, what this large literature shows is
it does work that way.
Contact theory, growing up in diverse neighborhoods,
growing up in diverse communities,
increases the likelihood of a broader umbrella
of what counts as an us.
That's good.
Where does it not work?
One realm where most of the studies have shown this
is a realm that's totally heartwarming.
And it would be great if it did work.
But most of the studies show that it doesn't.
These are the circumstances where somebody puts up
the money to take some really poor Irish Catholic kids
in Belfast, and some really poor Irish Protestant kids in there
during the worst of the civil unrest there.
And they get to go to someplace wonderful and far away.
And they all go to summer camp together.
And they have teams that are mixtures of the kids
by different religions.
And they're growing.
They're growing to recognize each other as individuals.
Or the versions, lots of which have been tried,
of sort of retreats or even camps of Palestinian teenagers,
Israeli teenagers.
These are the leaders in the future.
They will go back and have learned they're not
so different after all.
They're kind of just like us.
What those studies have generally shown
is that doesn't work.
It works for only a little while.
You can't just pull it off on a two-week camping trip.
It takes more sustained exposure.
It basically requires growing up in, or living sustainedly in.
So that's been a disappointment.
One additional disappointment with the contact theory
literature, which is one of the papers, which again I think I
put in the suggested reading.
OK, so you've got two different groups,
two different populations, two different ethnicities,
whatever.
And they are living in generally the same area,
but nonetheless segregated within group in smaller areas.
One scenario-- here's the region where these two groups live.
And there's an absolute boundary between them.
Here, instead, there's sort of an undulating boundary.
It's less clear.
And, critically, there is more surface area.
There is more interfaces between the two groups.
There's more domains of experiencing people
from the other group.
Finally, versions where instead you
have pockets of different groups embedded in other ones.
And that being a completely different scenario
where, in fact, you maximize the perimeter that you get there.
And what's been shown in this one study
that I recommended that you guys look at is the more
contact, the more interfaces, between the two
groups and living situations doesn't guarantee that people
will get along better.
What you will find is there's intermediate points where
the contact profile increases aggression,
because what it does is you just barely
have a critical mass of people on your side
to be an effective group to fight with them.
You see totally different outcomes,
depending on the spatial characteristics
of the subgrouping.
And what the people showed in this paper was
they then analyzed the different ethnic distributions
in the Balkans, the Bosnian War, the Croatians, all of that,
and seeing that this was extremely predictive of where
the violence took place in terms of where you had what they
viewed as the least optimal set of interfaces of contact
between groups.
More contact is not necessarily always equal,
more understanding and we're all just the same.
More contact can equal, in some cases, more irritation,
and more resources, and more unity to do something about it.
OK, more of pseudo kinship-- so this whole notion, again,
of pseudo kinship, we are species
where we're not recognizing individuals
by smell, all of that.
We're doing that cognition stuff.
But don't forget the [? kibbutz ?] study.
But we're doing that cognition stuff.
And, thus, we can do pseudo kinship.
And, thus, we could be manipulated
by powers that be, by governments, by religions,
and to viewing non-relatives as more related to us,
and all of that.
These are very abstract processes.
And it brings up another realm, an extremely abstract realm,
that pushes for more cooperation and less violence.
And this goes back to what I was talking
about the other day, the neurobiology of symbols,
how we code for certain types of symbols,
certain metaphors in our brain.
And that's back to that whole world
of, you're using the same part of the brain
for disgusting food and moral disgust, warm drink,
warm personality, that weird concrete literalness.
Because you've got a pretty metaphors somewhere
when humans started developing them,
the outcome of that being that metaphors
can be extraordinarily powerful.
And a number of researchers-- probably
the person most visible in this realm, an economist
University of Michigan named Robert Axelrod
as doing a whole lot of work showing, in a sense,
the importance of symbols in peacemaking.
And it makes perfect sense.
You take the extreme rationalist view
of humans as economic machines.
And what peacemaking is going to be purely about
is figuring out contested resources
and how they are going to be divided up.
And what Axelrod and others show,
instead, is this whole irrational realm of,
be respectful of somebody else's symbols.
And figuring out how you're going to divide up the land
suddenly becomes a lot less important--
the power of symbols over rational contested resources.
And he studied things like how a critical thing that
happened in peace coming to Northern Ireland
was at one juncture a bunch of the Sinn Fein, however
that's pronounced, the ex-military wing of the IRA
that were just beginning to have extremely
mistrustful negotiations with some of the Protestant unions
and all of that.
They did something outrageous.
They sent a 50th wedding anniversary gift
to this guy Ian Paisley, who was the murderous head
of the Protestant death squads there.
Somebody just decided to try this.
And this was a massive breakthrough.
Anyone who saw that movie Invictus or have read about,
the utter brilliance of Nelson Mandela,
of having spent his time in prison learning
to be completely fluent in Afrikaans
so that when he was sitting down and starting to negotiate
with these people, the fact that he could sit there and speak
in their language, a language that
is so laden with symbolic importance
to Afrikaners, that that was a gigantic symbolic coup
of Mandela embracing the sport that
was the very symbol of apartheid, of Mandela doing
very subtle things that a number of people
pointed out who were involved in the negotiations.
OK, Mandela, just when he's gotten out of prison,
and he's about to meet with some of the leaders
of the government, and some of the most right wing opponents
to any sort of peace.
And so we need a conference room.
And, no, that's not what he did.
He insisted they would have the meetings in his home, his home
that he had just returned to.
OK, well let's clear off the dining room table.
No, that's not what he did.
He would insist they did this in the living room, where
they would sit down on stuffed armchairs and couches.
And something that he did, apparently, always at these
is he would sit down on the couch, and gesture to whoever
was likely to be the most impossible foe,
and say, come sit next to me.
Sit next to me on the couch.
And would proceed to jump up at various points to say,
can I get you some more tea?
Do you want some more-- there would be food.
There would be biscuits.
There would be whatever-- brilliant, brilliant use
of symbols.
If I'm sitting here, and this guy
keeps jumping up and getting me more cookies just when I
was getting a hankering for some more cookies,
maybe not so different after all.
People who get cookies for other people
make the world more peaceful, or something or other.
What Axelrod has also shown in some of his work
is the potential for it-- really interesting stuff.
He will, for example, he and people working with him,
have interviewed, say, Hamas leaders in Palestinian,
and the Gaza, and the West Bank, some of the most
opposed to the existence of Israel, most confrontational
of groups.
And he gets quotes from their leaders along the lines of,
if the Israelis would ever once just say,
we got screwed in 1948.
And we're sorry it happened.
We would be willing to make peace.
And then he goes and talks to some Israeli generals
who are some of the most right wing ones.
He selects them for that.
And they sit there.
And they say stuff like, if the damn Palestinians would ever
just get the anti-Semitic garbage out of their school
books, we'd be able to think seriously about peace
the next day.
It's not about water rights.
It's not about return of land.
It's just about, are they going to respect
our symbols and the legitimacy of our history,
and the accuracy of it?
Enormously, potentially powerful interventions there.
OK, so kin selection-- most importantly, pseudo kinship.
Moving on now-- reciprocal altruism.
Where does that come in, in terms of potentially making
for more peace?
And what's clear is, in principle,
it should never do it if you are playing only a single round
of a game with someone, a game in the prisoner's dilemma
sense, because there's absolutely no reason
to cooperate, because you are never
going to face the person again.
And this is something that was called by a zoologist Garret
Hardin the tragedy of the commons,
and the circumstance of shared resources
but limited responsibility, and limited repeated interactions.
You have to select for selfishness.
You have to select for what is termed a Nash equilibrium,
where the only possible rational thing to do
there is to not cooperate.
So how do you ever get cooperation
to evolve in groups of organisms?
So back to the same Axelrod, his work with computer
tournaments there, with a tit for tat,
seeing that under some circumstances one of them
can dominate.
Tit for tat is a great optimal one.
In the real world, though, how do you ever
jump start cooperation?
How do you ever get one of those strategies going
when the starting state is complete lack of cooperation?
We already know one example, which is founder populations,
that whole business about get an isolated population has
a higher coefficient of relatedness, inbred,
out of kin selection.
Establish high degrees of cooperation.
They come back.
And it's this group selection phenomenon of,
you better become as cooperative as them.
Or you're not going to be able to compete.
And you could see the same exact thing
in circumstances where it is not a founder
effect of a population goes away for a while
and then comes back, but where a population is functioning
in that way amid a sea of non-cooperators.
In New York City in the 1980s, there
was this totally weird phenomenon
in that there were two ethnic groups that
were moving into New York at a much higher rate
than in the past-- Korean immigrants
and Lebanese immigrants.
And both groups happened to gravitate towards grocery
stores-- the Korean community fruit, vegetable stands,
the Lebanese community more regular old grocery stores.
And they were incredibly successful.
And these popped up all over the place.
And the people who already had the fruit and vegetable
stands and stuff started complaining that they
were at an unfair disadvantage.
How come?
Because these Korean shop owners would
cooperate with each other.
They would give each other interest-free loans.
That's not fair.
That's not fair that they're being nice to each other.
We can't compete.
And the same thing with the Lebanese grocery owners,
that you had people doing reciprocal altruism
in a community of trust.
And what they were immediately doing
was out competing the non-cooperators.
And amid these bizarre demands for, like, banning Korean fruit
and vegetable stands, or some-- like,
this was a point of great hostility
during that period in New York City
because those people were cheating.
They cooperated with each other.
So either join in.
Or you will be driven to extinction.
So that is one possibility.
What are the other circumstances in formal game theory
play that favors the emergence of cooperation?
Critical one-- repetition, that you're
going to play against this individual more than just once.
If it's run time, it's tragedy of the commons.
There is absolutely no reason to select for cooperation.
Repeated interactions, and it opens up
the possibility of you being punished
for being a cheater, what they call
the shadow of future retribution.
One qualifier with that, though-- you
need to have multiple rounds of interactions.
But it can't be a known number of rounds.
You can't know how many rounds it's going to be.
Think through this.
You know that this is the very last round
you are going to play.
And what's the only logical thing to do is to cheat?
The very last round functions as if it
was a tragedy of the commons single game, single round game.
So the only logical thing to do is
to cheat in the very last round.
In which case, the only logical thing to do
is to cheat in the next to the last round,
and the next to the last.
A known number of rounds of interactions
immediately does in cooperation because it sort of
flows backwards with this collapse of the system.
The next thing that favors it is what is called open book
play by people in the business, which is you
will be playing against a number of different individuals,
and pairs, cycling through.
And the critical thing is when you
begin to play with someone else, they
can know your record as to how you played in previous games.
In other words, once you bring in reputation,
when reputation can be possible, suddenly you
select for cooperation.
Next, what's shown is that if you have people playing
in multiple games with each other,
especially when they're unsynchronized,
you select for cooperation as well.
What's this about?
What you do is if one of the games makes it very,
very easy in terms of payoff for cooperation
to get established, if you intermix rounds
of that game with a game in which there is very little
motivation for cooperation starting, what you see
is a psychological bleed over.
If you are cooperating with this person in this game, which
is now done here now down here, it greatly
increases the odds of one doing the other game of beginning
to cooperate as well.
Multiple games, and it does not take
much to see that this is more like the real world
than playing prisoner's dilemma with one single individual.
Next, the possibility of punishing someone
when they are a creep.
And that's what we heard about before, what
is termed now in the field altruistic punishment.
If somebody does something crummy to you,
you are allowed to expend a certain amount
of your resources to take more of the resources
away from them.
That selects for cooperation.
Something that even selects faster
is second party altruistic punishing.
You are not taking part in the game.
You're watching these two individuals,
But you have the power to use some of your resources
to punish a cheater-- an outside enforcer.
That selects for cooperation even faster.
Then something that is even more effective, which is
termed secondary altruistic punishing.
Here's what you do.
What you do is people are observers
of other people's interactions, and seeing if they're cheating.
And they can do some altruistic punishment
if they think this individual is a jerk and all of that.
But here's what you do.
If there is a circumstance where somebody cheats
and this third party individual doesn't punish them,
they get punished.
What's that about?
That's honor code violations.
That's the expectation that you are
supposed to report someone who has had an honor code
violation.
And if you don't, you will get punished.
That selects for cooperation really fast also.
And all of these-- these have been computer tournaments,
and all of that.
You know that world of research by now.
Finally, more subtle stuff, gives the person
the opportunity to drop out of the game,
to secede from the game.
Give the person the opportunity to not play against you,
but to choose, I'll play against all these other individuals,
but not that one.
Begin to put that power in there.
And you select for cooperation that much faster.
So that's some good news.
Final level, the group selection level-- group selection
not in our behaving for the good of the species,
but as we know the more modern version of it,
selection for traits that are only
manifest at the level of whole groups.
A always loses to B. But groups of A always defeat groups of B.
All of the stuff we've been seeing,
people suddenly cooperating with each other as a small group,
and driving the non-cooperators out of business,
that's a group selection argument going on there.
So you can have that as a means for generating
a lot of cooperation.
That's great.
That makes the world a better place,
unless there is a downside to it.
And back to chimpanzees, what do you
have when a bunch of related chimps
are having not individual fights with males from the next valley
over, but functioning as a group?
You are having an example of group selection, which
thus brings up one of the most profoundly scary things
on this planet, which is when you've
got a bunch of males who are getting
along well with each other.
And they're beginning to look at the neighbors,
because lots of males cooperating together
can make for some very bad neighbors.
As some people in the field have emphasized,
a decrease in homicide within a group
is a prerequisite for inventing genocide between groups.
So group selection is not always this magical founder effect
of everybody wanting to learn the new folk songs.
What you've got instead are circumstances
where it can go very wrong.
Final amazing example showing the emergence
of cooperation-- and this was not
a game theory demonstration.
This was not an experiment.
This was a real event that happened,
and an extraordinary one.
This occurred during World War I. A lot of people
have heard about a phenomenon that happened there,
a historical incident that was very, very cruel,
but pales in comparison to what I'm about to tell about.
In 1914, the first Christmas of World War I, somehow
the decision was made that there was going
to be a truce on Christmas Day.
All of the fighting up and down the trenches
was going to cease for 24 hours.
And it has been documented.
It was amazing and bizarre.
Men out of the trenches playing soccer
with each other from different sides-- a bunch of German
and French guys playing against some British and German guys
on the other side, people exchanging gifts,
people exchanging helmets as souvenirs,
people singing together, people getting drunk together
from the two opposite sides.
And, eventually, when the officers
got them to go back to their job,
they returned to trying to kill each other-- amazing, bizarre
incident.
What was very striking about it is it extended,
actually, two or three days extra longer than
planned because the officers couldn't
get people to stop doing this.
That's very cool.
But that's an outside force already establishing
the cooperation.
Here's something much, much more impressive.
And this happened in World War I.
And it didn't take a bunch of generals or heads of states
to negotiate a truce-- the way in which truces
would spontaneously merge over and over again
across the trenches.
How do you generate a reciprocally altruistic
cooperative relationship with the enemy
in the trenches over there, where
you don't speak the same language
and you don't even see their faces?
Here's what you do.
You take your best gunner.
And have him come up and lob a shell
20 yards behind the trench there, and blow up a tree.
Now have you gunner lob a shell to hit the exact same spot
again, and do it again, and do it again.
Do it a bunch of times.
What are you communicating to the other side?
This guy's really good.
And we're choosing not to put the missile down on top of you.
What are you going to do about it?
And then the other side would get out their best gunner
and do the thing in return.
And you have just worked out a non-aggression pact.
And this occurred over and over again
in the trench warfare, documented in letters
by soldiers back home to parents, saying,
hi Mom and Dad.
Things are OK here.
I hope you're worrying less, because we've
worked out something.
Things are a lot better here.
There's a lot less people getting hurt.
Working it out along those lines, working out a tit
for tat vulnerability where you had
to have a forgiving tit for tat, what if somebody
messed up and accidentally dropped
a shell into the trench on the other side?
They got one shot back.
Letters, dear Mom and Dad, things are OK here.
We had an incident the other day.
We had this new gunner who didn't really
understand how things worked.
And I heard he killed four people on their side.
They shot one back.
They took out three of our people.
But everything is OK now.
Tit for tat, complete with a forgiving element--
this happened again, and again, and again,
in the trench warfare.
And the only thing that stopped it from spreading
is the fact that the officers kept
insisting that nobody else was doing this.
And these guys were going to get shot and court marshaled
if they didn't stop this.
And if they had only had cell phones,
if they only had communication, if they only
had a way of knowing up and down the line
that everybody was doing this, they
would have stopped the war-- not with a treaty,
not with generals, not with heads of state,
not with diplomats, but simply a bottom
up way of evolving cooperation.
And they would have stopped the war
if they knew that they weren't the only ones wanting
to do this-- amazing historical incident.
OK, so this gets us to the end of aggression.
As you probably noticed, this has gone on way long.
This is the longest amount of material
we spend on anything in the course.
And each year, it actually gets longer.
And I actually think I know the reason for it.
Three and a half lectures ago, where
did I start off talking about my recent exposure
to human aggression, which was my doing it,
and tripping up that jerk playing soccer.
And everybody was all excited.
Let me tell you about another time,
the most serious time I have ever been
exposed to human aggression.
This took place when I was about 20.
And this was first year that I was
doing research in East Africa.
During that time, the famed notorious dictator Idi Amin
was running Uganda.
And he was a nightmare.
He was just killing people left and right,
destroying the country, as documented, cannibalizing.
Was a nightmare of a dictator.
Around the time, he made a mistake.
This was spring of 1979, which is he invaded Tanzania and took
over some of the land there, thinking
the Tanzanians wouldn't fight back.
And he miscalculated.
The Tanzania army counterattacked, and drove them
out of Uganda, and decided to drive all the way to Kampala,
the capital of Uganda.
And they overthrew Idi Amin.
He fled the country.
And the country was liberated.
They continued through there.
And they opened up a corridor to the Kenyan border.
So it was now a swath all through the southern part
of the country that was controlled by Tanzania.
So the day after the Tanzanians got things
to the Kenyan border, I went into Uganda.
OK, why?
This was amazing.
This was history happening.
You were hearing on the BBC that people were dancing
in the streets in Kampala.
They had been liberated, amazing chance to see history.
This was-- through our college, I
had been spending a lot of time with Quakers,
and wrestling with those issues, and figured
if there is anything that counts as a just war,
this would be it.
What does this seem like?
All these philosophical principles.
This, actually, of course, was not what was going on.
I was a 20-year-old male.
And somebody had been staying with me, and no longer was.
And I was all bummed out.
And, thus, I did sort of a very 20-year-old male
adolescent primate thing, which is figuring some violence
would do some good things for my brain neurochemistry.
And I wanted to go see a war.
So I went off to Uganda, hitching through there.
And it was appropriately exciting.
And some things happened that scared the bejesus out of me.
And at some point, I finally decided I have had enough.
I want to go back to Kenya.
I want to feel safe again.
So I'm hitching back.
But I had one last thing that I want
to do, which was since I was a kid,
I had grown up reading about the explorers,
and the search for the source of the Nile and all of that.
The source of the white Nile is in Uganda.
It comes out of Lake Victoria in a town called Tororo.
And there's a spot there, a bridge
where you can go and stand.
And here is where the Nile River begins.
And I had to see this before leaving.
And I managed to get a ride into there.
And I managed to get over to this bridge, and stood there.
And there was this sort of dam thing
that was built that this bridge was on top.
And there was this sluice where all the water came spritzing
out, and started the Nile.
And I stood there.
And I looked over the side.
And what I saw was there was a Ugandan soldier
who had been taken down there.
There was a staircase along the side down to some sort of panel
for controls or whatever.
And a Ugandan soldier had been taken down
the steps, his hands tied behind his back,
and a rope tied around his throat
and attached to the panel.
So that as the water level rose, he
would eventually be swept off his feet
and would be strangled and drowned in the water.
And this body had obviously been there for days.
It was bloated.
It was floating there.
It was being bashed around on the waves.
There were crocs trying to get at it.
And looking at this guy, a total storm of emotions-- thinking,
good, that's what you deserve being in the army for Amin.
Then thinking, no, wait a second.
This is probably some poor guy who was forced to do it
and was just following orders.
Then thinking, no, I know what I think of soldiers
who just follow orders.
Then thinking, whoa, I would love to get a lot closer
and see what's happening down there.
And thinking, I want to get as far away from here as possible.
And I stood there for an hour and a half
at that spot staring at this guy until some Tanzanian soldiers
chased me away from there.
And I think now, 33 years later, that I
lecture longer and longer about aggression each year because
of that guy.
What do we do here in our business?
We have this general notion that if we are rational,
if we are learned, if we are scholarly,
if we respect thoughts and truth and all of that,
we will make the world a better place.
All of us who are professorial have somewhere in there
this totally ridiculous belief that if you're
allowed to lecture at a subject long enough,
it will give up and go away.
And that will be the cure for world aggression.
If everybody can only be lectured
to about the frontal cortex, it will solve world violence.
But the basic problem is that aggression is
such a messy set of behaviors.
Schizophrenia-- no question about it, bad news.
Alzheimer's disease, childhood cancer, global warming,
all of these unassailably bad news.
But aggression is a whole lot more complicated,
because of that point where we started with,
which is the same exact behaviors,
and depending on the context, it could
be something that would get a medal for someone, someone
you will want to mate with, vote for, reward, cheer on, join in.
And in another setting, it is the most frightening
possible thing that can happen to us.
And it's the same behaviors in all those cases.
And it's for that reason, that violence is always
going to be the hardest subject for us to understand
biologically.
And it's for that reason, that it's always
going to be the one we have to try hardest to understand.
 And we are not going to work our way
through the behavior on the right and march to the left.
And instead, we'll be trying to come up
with some ideas that are going to apply to everything
we hear about in here.
And overall, these are probably the most difficult lectures
of the course, the most difficult material,
in part because I'm not sure if I completely understand
what I'm talking about.
But also because this is intrinsically
some really different ways of thinking about things
in the realm of science.
And that's one of the reasons why
I forced you guys to read this Chaos book.
And again, as I think I mentioned in the first lecture,
this incites a subset of people to passionate enthusiasm
about the book.
It incites another small subset into just the most greatest
level of irritation that this was assigned.
And everybody else is just vaguely
puzzled and kind of sort of sees the point, but how come?
This book, when I first read it, and so my first introduction
to the whole field, this was like the first book
I had read where I finished it and immediately started over
again, the first one since, like,
Where the Wild Things Are in terms of influence.
This was an incredibly challenging book
in terms of questioning all the ways in which I
think about sort of reductive science.
And hopefully, it will do the same for you.
And as part of it, posted, there is the one and only homework
assignment in the entire course, which,
just to make things easier, will not be collected or looked at.
But what you should do is there is a whole exercise up there
in generating something that are called cellular automata.
Do not panic yet.
There's plenty of time to panic.
Where you will be making some of those on your own.
And all I ask from you guys in terms
of making sense of these exercises is
do not sleep between now and Friday.
Spend all of your time working on them, do nothing else.
Take occasional breaks to eat or the bathroom.
But other than that, do nothing but this
between now and Friday.
And let's see how everybody feels about it on Friday.
OK.
So picking up, where we need to start off with
is trying to get a framework for the standard Western approach
to understanding complicated systems with scientific bases.
400 or so AD, Rome falls, collapse of the Roman Empire,
entering an unbelievably dark period in terms of ignorance,
in terms of the Dark Ages throughout Europe,
the level at which people did not
understand how the world worked, the level
at which people had lost knowledge from previous times.
Books were gone.
Philosophers were gone.
The level of just isolation, intellectual isolation,
was phenomenal.
It was during that period, it was
as if 500 years before people had known the cure for cancer,
and for AIDS, and for being able to fly on your own,
and all of that, and somehow in the aftermath of the empire
falling apart, all of that knowledge was lost.
Literacy went down the tubes.
And this was a period that gave rise to words like,
having an audit, having an audit about your finances,
making an oral argument before the judges,
having hearings about something or other before the court.
Because all of these were about speaking,
about auditory transmission of information because nobody
could read anymore.
This was a period where there was
no Western European language that had the word progress
or ambition in it.
These were non-existent concepts at the time.
Utter intellectual isolation, utter social isolation,
during a time the vast majority of people
lived in small villages, where you would go 50 miles away
and people spoke a dialect that you could not understand,
that degree of isolation.
Estimates are the average person never went
more than 12 to 15 miles away from where
they were born in their entire life, incredible isolation.
And incredible ignorance ultimately
about how you explain causality in the world because of all
of the information was gone.
Then something dramatic changed in the year
1085, which is the first European Christian conquest
of a major Islamic city, a major Moorish one in this case,
Toledo in Spain.
Spain at the time, which was Moorish and known as Alhambra
at the time, this was the first city
to fall to Christian troops since Islam swept in there.
And this was basically sort of a second rate kind of city.
This was not some major center, Toledo.
But simply by European forces having
captured that city, something extraordinary happened, which
was within that city was a library, with more books than
existed in all of Christian Europe put together.
This simple library in this sort out of the way podunk sort
of the city there out in the boondocks,
one run-of-the-mill library there had more cumulative
information than was available to all of Europe at the time.
And suddenly, Europe got to rediscover philosophers,
Aristotle, Plato, all of that.
They got to rediscover logic.
They got to rediscover all the great works.
Suddenly all of those flooded back
into Europe and the first beginnings of sort
of a modern mindset about complexity started to emerge.
People suddenly began to do things, like able to think
transitive and with transitivity,
in a transitive manner, where you would see a is bigger
than b, b is bigger than c.
And you had this startling revolutionary notion,
which is you now can know something
about the relationship between and a and c
without having to directly compare them with each other.
This was an astonishing sort of logical breakthrough.
Syllogism, syllogism suddenly appeared in Europe
for the first time in centuries, the ability
of people to do things like, say,
if all things that glow have fire, then
stars glow and thus stars have fire, syllogistic thinking.
That had been utterly gone.
And suddenly, people began to think
about what is, where that had been lost for centuries.
And all of that culminated in a certain sort
of emergence of what we would now call science.
Thomas Aquinas coming up with an amazing,
an amazing quote, that summarizes all of what
was happening at the time.
He listed three things that God could not do.
The first two were just sort of theological stuff.
God cannot sin.
God cannot make a copy of himself.
It's the third one that was just earth-shaking.
Third, even God cannot make a triangle with more than 180
degrees.
And in that one concept, Aquinas had just
said if it comes up against sort of the old knowledge
and science, science wins.
And that was an absolutely landmark moment.
God could do anything, but still can't make a triangle
with more than 180 degrees.
This was the beginning of the transformation of the world.
And this immediately had impact, all sorts of domains,
not just this very pedestrian one,
which is if something broke you could fix it.
That was a concept that was very, very rare around then.
But the ability to construct events
by looking at overlapping fragments.
A crime has occurred and there is
no individual who has watched the entire crime happen.
But one person saw what happened from point A to C. One
saw from B to D. One for all from C to--
and suddenly, there was this realization
that you can figure out what went on
by putting these various overlapping bits of data
together, a completely revolutionary idea
and completely transformed the notion that how
do you figure out if somebody did a crime prior
to this period, what you would do
is to throw them in the river, for example.
And if they sank and drowned, obviously they
had done the crime.
Good luck there.
In terms of having figured that out, good detective work.
That's how you think figured if somebody had
done something wrong or not.
You set fire to them.
And if they burned, oh, they were obviously guilty.
And suddenly this concept instead,
not only using facts, not only using observational data,
but that you could derive what occurred without any one
individual having seen the whole thing.
You can reconstruct things with overlapping.
This was just landmark.
This just transformed everything.
And somewhere around this time began
to emerge what we would recognize
to be sort of the proto-baby steps of what
would be modern science.
And in the aftermath of this period came what was basically
the single most important concept
in all of science in the last 500 years,
which is the idea of reductionism.
To find, very simply, if you want
to understand a complex system, you break it down
into its component parts.
And when you understand the individual parts,
you will be able to understand the complex system.
Reductionism, this is at the core of everything
that we do in science, in modern science, centuries worth.
The notion that complicated things
can be explained by looking at their component
parts, the smaller pieces that make them up.
And what's intrinsic in that is the concept of linearity,
of additivity.
You got something complex and you break it down
into its component parts.
And once you figure out how those component parts work,
all you need to do is add them together
and they will increase in their complexity in a linear manner
and you will produce the whole complex system.
This is Westernized reductionism.
And it came with a bunch of corollaries,
that we take for granted by now.
The first one being, in a reductive system
where the component parts and how they worked,
just add them together.
And in a straightforward way, that
will produce your complex system.
One sort of consequence of that is
if you know the starting state of a system,
as defined here, if you know what the little component
parts all are, if you know the starting state,
you will have 100% predictability
of what the full complex mature system will look like.
So starting state allows you to predict what comes later.
And related to that, if you know the complex system,
you can figure out what was the starting state.
That there is point for point relationship
between the simple building blocks
and the complex systems that come out the other end.
And this gave rise to an extraordinary thing,
which was the ability to extrapolate,
to be able to see the answer to something
in different iterations, and to use the same rules
and apply them over and over.
OK, what do I mean by this?
Suddenly this amazing notion that, OK, if x plus y equals z,
you will then know that x plus 1 plus y
is going to equal z plus 1.
And x plus 2, all of that.
And the same exact principle would
hold for some, like, bizarre idiot equation or whatever,
like that.
It doesn't really matter what all of this is.
You know absolutely beforehand simply by this business
of additivity of component parts that whatever this is,
it's going to equal z plus 1.
You could come up with an answer to something
without having to go through the calculations all over again.
You could go through x plus whatever
and you know it's going to be z plus whatever without having
to sit there and measure it.
You could extrapolate.
You can use reductive knowledge, the linearity,
going from this to this.
You're still using the same rules.
That allows you to go from this to this.
Applications of it are purely reductive linear set
of systems.
And this was revolutionary.
So that's great.
You don't need to go through all the calculations at every step
of the way to be able to know the starting state
and thus know what the mature state is about.
Look at the mature state, you know
what the starting state was point for point to relatedness.
That's great.
Finally, another feature of reductive systems
like these is the really fancy ones require blueprints.
What do I mean by blueprints in this case that requires already
a notion of what the mature state is supposed to look like?
Which is intrinsic in what I just said,
if you know the starting state, you will know the mature state.
But the belief that in terms of quality control,
you have to have some representation of what
the mature state is supposed to look like,
a blueprint; in order to know if you're doing the right thing,
feedback along those lines.
If you're really going to do something hard and fancy
in this reductive world, you've got
to have a road map at the beginning.
You have to have a blueprint.
You have to have something that already shows you
what the outcome is going to be when you apply
these linear additive rules.
And the way you go about doing it
is shaped by the blueprint, the instructions that
are intrinsic in this.
This is everything about Westernized reductionism.
One important additional component to it, which is you
go measure something or other.
And what's the normal temperature in humans, 98.6.
There's no way you take a whole bunch
of perfectly healthy humans and they're all going to have 98.6.
There is going to be 98.6 and there
will be variability around it.
And you could express that so that you wind up
having an average of 98.6 and some sort of term
that denotes variability.
There's variability.
There's different values for something
that winds up averaging out to something like this.
And thus this critical question, in a reductive world
of thinking about science and the way fancy things work,
what do you make of variability?
What is variability about?
An intrinsic in this whole world of know the starting state,
you know the mature state; you know the mature state,
you knew how the starting state was.
The rules allow you to extrapolate.
It takes a blueprint.
Intrinsic in there was an absolute clear opinion
as to what variability is, which is to say it's noise.
It's junk in the system.
It's a pain in the rear.
And it's stuff you want to get rid of.
What is intrinsic in this whole reductive view is noise
represents instrument error; instrument
error, instrument in the largest metaphorical sense.
Instrument, somebody's observation to machinery.
Variability represents noise, represents the system
you use to measure stuff, to observe stuff
not working perfectly.
It represents something you want to avoid.
And what was also intrinsic in that inductive view
is the surest way to avoid that is to become more reductive.
The notion that the closer you look to a phenomenon, the more
detail you see it with, the more you
are looking at a more reduced level
closer to the component parts, the closer
you will be to seeing what's actually going on.
And as you look closer and closer,
variability should disappear.
Because the variability is just noise in the system.
And if you're trying to measure people's body temperature
by being up in a Zeppelin and looking
at people with your sort of binoculars
and trying to see if they're sweating or not
and come up with an estimate then,
that's going to be a lot more variable than if you now
do something more reductive, like put
your hand on their forehead.
Oh, do they feel hot or not?
And thus, there will be less variability.
And even less if you now invent yourself a thermometer.
This whole notion that as you get fancier techniques
for examining a phenomenon, as you get techniques that
allow you to be more and more reductive
and look closer and closer, there will be less variability.
Because sitting way down at the bottom of all
this reductive processes there is an iconic, an absolute,
an idealized norm as to what the answer is.
If you see anybody not having 98.6
it's because there's noise in your measurement systems.
Variability is noise.
Variability is something to get rid of.
And the way to get rid of variability
is to become more reductive.
Variability is discrepancy from seeing what
the actual true measure is.
And that has been a driving force
essentially in all of science in terms
of the notion of inventing new ways to look at things.
More powerful microscopes, more powerful ways
of measuring the levels of something or other
in the bloodstream, all of them built around the notion
that the closer we look to the component parts,
the closer we will be to seeing how the system really
truly works and be able to finally see what truly
is going on without the noise.
Because all noise is is discrepancy
from what is truly going on.
So in that view, what you, of course, wind up
having is an extension of that in beginning to think about
how, like, bodies work in biology and all that,
as you begin to look at that as an example of a very
complicated system.
And, of course, what you then have
in a reductionist view is if you want to understand
how the body works, you need to understand how the organs work.
And if you want to understand how organs work,
you need to understand how cells work,
and cells all the way down to molecules,
all the way down there.
And the notion that the closer you get to all the way
down there, and once you understand things down
at that level, the purer, the more accurate
your answers will be.
And all you do then is add the pieces together and out
comes your whole body.
So where does that begin to cause problems?
The fact that the body simply can't
work that way, a whole bunch of realms in which reductionism
has to fail when you're looking at biological systems.
One example of this, the first one, and this
is immediately jumping into neurobiology,
this was classic work, work done by these two neurobiologists.
Anyone who was in BioCore sort of
went through me haranguing about how great these guys were,
a pair of neuroscientists, Hubel and Wiesel,
absolute giants in the field.
In the 1950s, up to the 1960s, everybody
thought that they had discovered exactly how the cortex worked.
And what they found was a phenomenally clean reductive
world of how you extracted information
from the visual world around you.
I will spare you the details because it's not important.
But what they basically showed was
you could find individual cells in the retina that corresponded
to individual neurons in the simplest
part of the visual cortex.
And between them, you had simple point for point reductive
relationships.
If you stimulated this one retinal cell,
it's associated neuron in this part of the cortex
would get excited and have an action potential.
If you shift your electrode over a smidgen
and stimulate the one right next to it,
the neuron right next to this one is going to get stimulated.
In other words, if you know the starting state, which
receptors in the eye have been stimulated,
you have 100% predictability of which neurons appear,
are going to fire.
And the converse, know which ones fired here.
And you have complete information
about the starting state.
And what they did was begin to build on that.
They showed that insofar as that first layer of the cortex
had this one to one correspondence with one cell
here to one cell there, what did individual neurons know
about in this simple part of the visual cortex?
These neurons knew how to recognize dots.
Each neuron could recognize a dot
and one dot only and was the only neuron that recognized it.
This was a point for point reductive system.
And take all those individual little neuron component parts,
each of which then knew something about one dot,
and put them together and you could
begin to get some information about what just hit the eye.
What they then showed was the next layer of the cortex.
And again to simplify things as much as possible,
what they began to see was you would now
stimulate one of those retinal cells
and one neuron in the first layer of cortex
would get excited.
Nothing would happen in the second layer.
Shift over, stimulate the next one over,
the next one over, nothing in the next part of the cortex,
over and over and over, over and over and over,
and then suddenly one of the neurons in the second cortex
gets excited.
If and only if you first stimulate this photoreceptor,
followed by this, followed by this, followed by this,
followed by this.
What does that neuron know about, light moving
in a straight line in this direction.
That part of the cortex could extract the information
from that first layer and put them together and get
different sorts of information.
And, thus, you would have another neuron there
that would code for an angle that was slightly different,
and another one there.
And then ones for different parts
of the cortex, different parts of the visual system,
and very long lines or very slow moving lights
or things like that.
What do neurons in that second layer know about?
They know how to recognize straight lines.
And you could see again, this is a reductive system.
Because you know the wiring that goes from one layer,
from the eye, to this layer, to this layer.
And thus, if you know what's going on here,
you can work backwards and know what's happening there
and what's happening in the eye and the same
with the other direction.
A point for point system, where now you're
beginning to extract a higher level, a hierarchy of analysis,
but the same exact reductionism.
And just to then begin to show what they then went on to,
again this is very simplified, now
you begin to get neurons here.
One of them will respond to this line.
Another will respond to this line.
Another will respond to this line.
If and only if these three neurons
are firing simultaneously, one neuron
in the next layer of the visual cortex would fire.
What do neurons there know about?
Each one knows about a curve and one curve only.
The same exact thing again, which
is point for point reductionism.
If you want to understand the system,
you need to understand how every single neuron is wired
to every next one in line.
And once you got that, all you need to know
is what information, what activity,
is happening at any level.
And you've got 100% knowledge of what will be going on here,
and here, and here, a purely reductive system.
Everybody loved this.
This was the greatest stuff that happened in neurobiology.
This was arguably the most important work in neurobiology
between, like, 1950, 1975.
The two of them got their Nobel Prize.
People would have given them a dozen if they could of.
Because what had they just solved,
they just showed how the brain processes sensory information,
how it extracts information from the world around
and turns it into complex bits of sensory information.
Because it was completely obvious at this point what
was going to happen, which was above this,
there would be a layer that had neurons
that could respond to a certain number of curves
simultaneously.
It can start seeing three dimensions.
And then above that is one where the three dimensions
are changing over time.
It can detect movement of a three-dimensional object.
And the notion was you would be able to just go
up a layer after layer of reductive pointilist wiring
and way up on top, you would have this super-duper layer
of visual cortical processing.
And all the way up on top, somewhere up there,
you would now have a neuron that knew one thing and one thing
only, knew how to recognize your grandmother's face
at this angle.
And the notion would be that right next to it
was another neuron that recognized your grandmother's
face at this angle, and then one like this.
And right behind, with the rows of neurons
recognizing your grandfather.
And everybody decided this is it.
Just take this world of Hubel and Wiesel's
stepwise extraction of information and keep going.
And that's how the brain winds up recognizing faces.
And meanwhile, people subsequently
showed in the auditory cortex that the correspondence
between one cochlear cell, one hair cell there,
recognizing a single note, up to chords, up to OK.
So now you go up enough layers there
and you will find a layer that your single neurons then
know your grandmother's favorite symphony.
And that's it.
All the way up, you would eventually
find neurons that were specialized in really
complex sensory information.
And all you had to do was just keep
going like this in this purely reductive way
and you've got it up there on top.
And people at the time actually did
refer to these as grandmother neurons.
The notion that enough layers up here,
you would get neurons that responded to a really
complex thing and only to that.
And it was the only neuron that responded to that point
for point, one thing and one thing only.
And that all you needed to do was just keep doing this
and you would eventually get neurons that
recognized your grandmother.
So right around the time that Hubel and Wiesel got
their third layer here, and this took them about 15 years,
they decided to go study something else
in the visual system.
And that turned out to be at least as interesting
as this stuff.
But everybody else leapt in at that point,
to try to find the next layer, and the layer,
and the next layer.
And Hubel and Wiesel had shown a remarkable bit
of wisdom or intuition by bailing
on the field at that point.
Because to this day, hardly anybody
has ever shown the existence of a grandmother neuron
all the way down there.
They simply don't exist.
OK, that's a lie.
They do exist.
But there's very few of them.
There's sparse coding.
Occasionally, you find neurons that show grandmother
neuron-like processes, neurons, a single neuron that
will respond to a face and only one type of face,
way up there in many layers of visual cortical processing.
There are some of those.
And there was a paper in Nature some years ago,
which was one of the weirdest papers I have ever seen.
Really interesting in terms of what it showed,
but weird from the standpoint of what
were these folks thinking to actually test this?
And they were recording from the very upper layers
of visual cortex in monkey brains.
And they found some neurons that responded.
One neuron would respond only to a certain human face,
encoding a grandmother-type neuron.
Here's the bizarre thing in that paper.
What they discovered were neurons
in the brains of these rhesus monkeys,
where there would be a single grandmotheresque neuron.
And what they found was a neuron that
would respond to a picture of Jennifer Aniston.
You think I'm being sarcastic.
They found a Jennifer Aniston neuron,
which would respond to a photograph of her
at all sorts of different angles, a caricature, all
of that.
They went and showed the grandmother specificity of this
by showing that-- and this is in the paper-- it did not
respond to Julia Roberts.
It did not respond to Brad Pitt.
Brad's very meaningfully with that.
It did not respond to Jennifer Aniston and Brad Pitt
in the same picture.
And God knows what was going on with Angelina Jolie with that.
OK, that shows how bizarre it is.
The one other thing they discovered
this neuron would respond to was a picture of the Sydney Opera
House.
What's up with that?
So this is, to knowledge, almost a perfect reductive grandmother
neuron.
The bizarre thing being, what made these guys figure, I know,
let's go get a picture of Jennifer Aniston
and show it to the rhesus monkey and see what happens?
Where did that come from?
I recall, there was not a whole lot
of illuminating information in the methods section
as to where those sort of pictures came from.
But, so there are some these.
Some of them do exist, cases of what people in the field
call sparse coding, where you only need a few neurons
to recognize some really fancy things, like Jennifer Aniston.
Nonetheless, the vast, vast majority of the attempts
to find grandmother neurons failed dismally,
for a very simple reason.
OK.
How many neurons do you need where each one knows one dot
and one dot only?
You need the exact same number of neurons
as the number of photoreceptors in your retina.
How many neurons do you need in this layer
that turns these into lines?
Well, you need one that's going to respond
to a line of this length, and then one that
will respond to this length, and one of this length,
and one of that length, and the one that's
a slightly different angle.
You need, like, 10 times more neurons in this layer than this
to be able to pull off that processing.
How many neurons do you need in this layer?
Like, tenfold, 100-fold more than here.
And how come you don't even have the next layer,
let alone the grandmother neurons in these three numbers
because you run out of neurons.
There's not enough neurons in the brain, let alone
the visual cortex, to process stuff that way.
You can't have a layer above that
because you've run out of neurons.
In other words, there's not enough neurons in the brain
to do face recognition in a point for point reductive
manner.
The system breaks down because of lack
of enough numbers of things.
And what people have been doing ever
since then, what's become the dominant sort of approach
in that field, is an explicitly non-reductive approach, which
is now looking at something called neural networks.
Information, the really fancy complex information,
like what everybody else from Friends
looked like, except for the Aniston neuron.
Really complex information is not
coded for in a single protein, a single synapse,
a single neuron.
It's coded for in patterns, in patterns of activation
across hundreds, thousands of neurons,
networks that are interacting.
So you have a complete crashing and burning of what up to here
seemed like the greatest demonstration of point
for point reductive processing of sensory information, which
just led you all the way up to grandmother neurons.
And they basically don't exist because you run out
of neurons at this point.
You can't solve the problem of recognizing faces
by using reductive component partner biology.
The next domain where it falls apart as well.
OK, what do we have here?
Either we've got a canal on Mars,
or we've got a frost patten on a window, or we've got a tree,
or we've got a pattern of, like, long branching of some sort.
What do we have?
We have a bifurcating system.
And the characteristic of a bifurcating system
is it is scale-free.
On a certain level, if this is what the drainage line looks--
you know, the Nile emptying out into sort of the Mediterranean
as seen by a satellite.
And if you're looking at the dendrites
on one single neuron with an appropriate microscope,
if you look at it formally in terms of the branching pattern,
you can't tell which one you are looking at.
The complexity of the branching is scale-free.
So it turns out some of the most important things
we have in our bodies are bifurcating systems.
All the branch points on neurons are bifurcating.
And maybe what we'll post is some amazing pictures
of bifurcating dendritic trees of neurons.
And they're called dendritic trees
because they look just like trees.
And when they get more complex for some reason,
you are said to have increased their arborization, using terms
straight out of treeology, so neuronal complexity in terms
of its branch points.
Look at the circulatory system and it's the same thing
as a bifurcating system.
You've got your descending aorta, which is ascending here.
And then it splits into two, and splits into two,
and splits in-- and it a tree, bifurcating
into a whole bunch of little capillaries at the end.
You look at the pulmonary system and it
is the exact same bifurcation, coming down
your trachea, which splits into two bronchos,
and then splits into branchioles or whatever.
And it's the same exact thing.
So you've got this theme of bifurcating systems
throughout living systems in the body.
And notice the difference in scale.
If this is the blood vessels, we are talking about millions
of cells making up the blood vessel walls.
But here, we are seeing potentially
the exact same complexity of branching
in a neuron that's a single cell, independent of scale.
And you can have just as complex branching coming off
of a single neuron as the branching you're getting
in a gazillion different capillaries
in the tree of projections it comes from,
the same exact degree of complexity.
So now we come to the problem here,
which is so how does the body code for that?
How does the body give out the instructions
as to how to make a bifurcating system?
And this is where you immediately run into trouble.
What's a world we're sort of oriented to?
In a purely reductive world, there
is some sort of set of rules telling an aorta, that's
growing like this, that there is some gene or genes which
specify the point where this bifurcates.
And this bifurcates and it's two inches
in diameter or something.
Meanwhile, at a later point, where
it's about an inch in diameter, it bifurcates.
It's a different gene or set of genes
that specifies this bifurcation and another type of gene that
specifies the next one.
And those are obviously going to be totally different sorts
of genes than specifying the same branching
patterns of the neuron.
This is one cell.
Here, you're having to specify thousands of cells
and at what point do they stop adhering in a certain way
so you can make a split there.
And you look at this and suddenly you've
got the same problem, which is there's not
enough genes in the genome that exist
to be able to code this way.
You can't code for bifurcating systems
in a living organism that covers completely different scales.
From one cell up to zillions of cells,
you can't code for it in a point for point reductive way, where
the points down at the bottom, the component parts,
are individual genes.
You can't code for recognizing your grandmother
with simple reductive component parts of neurons.
You can't code for the bifurcating systems in the body
because these will bifurcate out to millions of capillaries
and there's only 20,000 genes.
The reductive approach breaks down here as well.
Reductive point for point approaches
break down when you get to the cortex,
trying to do something fancy, like recognizing faces, instead
of dots.
And it breaks down when you look at bifurcating systems that
have to have a plan to split, and then split, and then split
a million times to get all the capillaries out there.
You can't code for it with a reductive approach.
If there's not enough neurons, there's not enough genes.
The next way in which reductionism fails,
and the notion that if you know the starting state,
you'll know the complex version and the other way around,
all of that, and we've already gotten this.
We got this back when, in the molecular genetics lectures,
which is the role of chance in these systems.
All of that stuff we heard about, about sort of molecules
vibrating, Brownian motion.
And what that winds up doing is when cells split,
it's going to be unequal distributions of mitochondria.
It's going to be things of that.
Sheer chance is going to throw off
your ability to deal with a reductive point for point
system.
You take identical twins and they're
each at the, like, fertilized egg stage.
And what you know in a reductive world is
when it splits in two in this twin,
and splits in two in this twin, this cell
is going to be identical to this one, this one
identical with this, all the way down to single molecules
because this is a reductive world in terms
of how they split.
And what we know is by the time a cell splits
for the first time, this split is
going to distribute the mitochondria
between these two differently than distributed
between these two.
Even at the first cell division, chance
is throwing off this ability to know the starting state
and know what the complex system is going to be.
So reductionism breaks down there as well, the fact
that chance plays a role in any of these systems.
The mitochondria wind up dividing unequally,
the transcription factors.
You remember all that stuff from there.
The same exact thing with transposons,
with genes jumping around.
You throw in that randomizing chance element
into there as well.
You can't take the starting states
and wind up building on it.
An example in behavior, a guy named
Ivan Chase did this really interesting research
with dominance behaviors, the emergence of dominance
in different species.
OK.
So you are going to have a colony of, like, 10 fish.
And what you do initially is each one of them
is in a tank of their own.
And you set up a round-robin tournament.
You get every possible pairing of fish.
You put them against each other.
And you see which one is dominant of that pair.
So you've done all of that.
And you were able to derive a dominance hierarchy, where
the number one fish is the one that dominated all
the other nine in those dyadic interactions.
Number two dominated eight of them, so on.
It is simply a process, a syllogistic expansion,
to be able to then generate a dominance hierarchy;
pure, I know the starting state, every single dyad
and what the outcome was.
I can now predict what the dominance hierarchy
is going to be when you put all the fish together.
And what he sees, of course, is once you actually
get the fish together in a social group,
there is no resemblance whatsoever.
The dyadic pairing dominance outcomes
has zero predictability over what the actual dominance
hierarchy is going to be like.
Why should that be?
Because chance plays a role as well.
You are fish and you've learned this transitivity stuff,
as fish are able to do, at least in Professor Fernald's lab.
And they're able to do, if he defeats him
and he defeats me, I better give that guy
a subordinating gesture.
We've now just fit together two of those pieces,
establishing the dyad beforehand.
But what if the guy happens to be facing the other way
and doesn't see him dominating him?
And you've just lost the chance.
Chance interactions wind up driving the system.
Random movement of the animals and such winds up meaning
knowing the starting states of the dominance
relations of every single dyad gives you
zero predictability of what the complex system is
going to look like.
So what we have over and over here
is, amid this wonderful Westernized focus
on reductionism-- and this is going
to tell us exactly how complex systems work,
and the starting state, and the form,
we're seeing here over and over in biological systems,
ranging from behavior of entire organisms, down to genes,
reductive systems break down because there's simply not
enough pieces in there to explain
complex function in a point for point reductive component part,
broken down, add them up together afterward way.
And there's no way to deal with the fact
that chance plays a role in biological systems.
So what have we just gotten to here?
500 years or so into this reductive program,
what we're seeing is if you kind of are interested in behavior,
or the brain, or any of that stuff, what you've just
discovered is the most interesting domains
of brain function, of genetic regulation,
the most interesting stuff can't be regulated
in a classical reductive way.
It breaks down there.
It can't be that way.
It's got to be something else.
So what this will do now is transition us
into this whole issue of chaotic systems.
What happens when you have a system that is not reductive,
where there is non-linear nonadditivity,
where you suddenly have a very different picture?
If a clock is broken, you take the pieces apart
and you find the one tooth or one gear there that's missing
and you fix that.
And you now are able to put the pieces back together
in an additive way and you will have fixed the clock.
A clock can be fixed using reductive point
for point knowledge.
Now, you have a problem with something else.
You have a cloud that doesn't rain enough during a drought.
How are you going to figure out what's wrong?
I know.
Let's divide the cloud in half and then
get better tools so we can divide each half into half,
and each half into half.
And eventually, we'll get like one molecule worth of cloud
and a gazillion of them.
And we understand how each one of them works.
And put them together and then we'll
understand why there's a drought.
It doesn't work that way.
Reductive approaches can be used to fix clocks.
Reductive approaches can't be used to understand
why clouds don't rain.
And the whole point of all chaos in these lectures
here is when you look at the interesting complex biological
systems, they're clouds.
They're not clocks.
You need a whole different explanatory system.
So let's take a five-minute break.
And we will transition to beginning
to look at what chaoticism is about, about this science.
Showing that Westernized reductionism
is really good for fairly uncomplicated systems
breaking down in component parts.
The whole world of this stuff we find interesting,
it can't work because there's not enough component parts.
There's not a blueprint that has enough elements
in it and because of the role of chance.
And what this transitions us into
are non-linear systems, nonadditive systems,
where you break something down to its component parts,
and you study all these pieces, and you put it
back together again, and it's going to be different.
They've added up differently.
You understand the starting point in the system
and you are going to have no predictability about what
the complex form is about because the pieces don't add up
in a straight linear manner.
OK.
What do I mean by this?
As we begin to approach this, what is chaotism about?
Here, we have a distinctive thing.
We have a difference between two different ways in which things
can be deterministic.
Here's a-- no.
You're just coming up with a number series.
And there's a rule.
There's a rule which determines what
the next number is going to be in the sequence, which
is just add 1.
This is a determinist system.
It is a periodic one, in that knowing what the rule is
and knowing which point you're at,
someone could say what's it going
to be in 15 steps down the line there?
And you don't need to say, well, number one is going to be 5,
number two is going to be 6, number-- you
don't need to do that.
You've recognized a periodicity that
allows you to predict pieces way down
the line simply by applying the same determinist
rule over and over.
This would be a system that's both determinist and periodic.
Now, in contrast, you can get a system
which is determinist, but aperiodic,
which is where we're heading very quickly.
You have some system where there's a sequence of numbers.
There's a sequence of places on a three-dimensional matrix.
There's a sequence.
And there are rules for how you go from each step
to the next one.
But the thing is, you can't just apply the same rule
over and over.
You cannot sit here and say, if we start at number five,
and given what the rule is, I know what it's going to look
like 10 of these down.
The only way to know is to see what
five produces, as the first step, what that
produces as the second step.
You cannot see periodicity.
You cannot see patterns that repeat.
The only way to know the complex form
is to go stepwise and apply the rule over and over again.
Because the relationship between any one step
here is going to be different from any other one.
Here, it's always the same.
Each one is one higher, straight-forward, additive.
You just keep doing it over and over again.
In an aperiodic system you have rules.
It's determinist.
But the rules are such that the spaces,
the difference with each step, is not constant.
The only way you can know what the number is going
to be like x number of rounds down
is you got to do this, and then this,
and then this, and then this.
This is an aperiodic system.
At any given one of these points,
the rules exist for you to know what
the next one is going to be.
But the rules don't exist for you
to know what the one two down is going to be,
unless you figure out what this one is.
You've got to march through in that sort of way.
It's aperiodic.
There are no patterns that can be used over and over again.
The third version is one that people
mistake for what I'm talking about here, which
is a system which is nondeterminist because there
is randomness in there.
And in that one, going from this one to the next one,
there is no rule.
It's totally random what the next number is going to be.
And the one after that is totally random.
In that one, you have no predictability.
You're going to have to go every single step down the line.
But it's not a determinist system.
There's no set of rules that are being
applied over and over again.
The nature of this one does not specify the nature of that.
It's not determinist in that way.
That's not what we're going to be interested in here,
where randomness comes in.
What all of these non-linear systems are about,
these chaotic systems are ones where they are determinist.
There's rules for how you go every step along the way.
But the relationship, given any given step, is non-linear.
They're not identical.
And thus, the only way to know what's
happening two down from here is to know
what's happening one down, the only way to do that.
And thus by definition, this cannot be a system where
knowing the starting state allows you to know the mature
system.
Without having to go through every single calculation
and knowing the mature state, doesn't tell you
what the starting state was unless you
are willing to do all the back calculations because it's not
reductive in that sense.
Where would this begin to sort of manifest itself?
OK.
Into the Chaos book, and I think it was page 27 or so,
that you get the water wheel coming up for the first time.
And go and look at this picture, obsess over it,
understand what that page is about.
Because it begins to show how these properties
of non-linear aperiodicity wind up producing chaotic systems.
OK.
So you've got this water wheel.
And it's got these buckets here.
And they've got holes in the bottom.
And you can have a very simple steady state.
You just put in a little bit of water, such
that the water is basically, as soon as it gets here,
it's running out.
It's coming out in the same state.
This never fills.
The water wheel doesn't turn.
Now, you begin to fill up at a higher rate.
And what that does is it's a little bit asymmetrical.
This is heavy enough that it now begins to push the wheel down.
And as it's going down, this next one
is getting filled, and this next one.
And all the while, it's emptying out.
So a constant input of water, a rate of things emptying,
the wheel turns.
It's possible to get a rate at which you're pouring water
into the system, where it will do precisely
that for the rest of time.
It will turn at a set speed.
It is a steady state.
It is in the equilibrium state.
It is stable such that if you sit here right now
and somebody tells you, in a circumstance like this,
the wheel is turning this fast, in this direction,
with this force, you can sit there
and you can tell them thus exactly what it
will be doing 4,070 years from now on Tuesday afternoon.
It is a periodic system.
You don't have to sit there and go
through every second between now and 4,000 years from now.
It is steady state.
And you can apply a periodic-- there's periodicity.
There's a reductive quality to it.
Now, what you do is you put in the water
with a little more force.
And what begins to happen is the wheel
turns faster because the wheel is filling up
with water faster.
So it's moving this way faster.
And that's great.
That's totally logical.
But at some point, if you're doing that,
there's going to be too little time for these buckets
to empty out.
They're going to start having more water
when they're coming up on this side
because it's moving fast enough, but they are not emptying.
And at some point, there's going to be enough water left here
that it will suddenly change direction.
OK.
It's possible, if you get the water pressure just right,
that you can get a steady state pattern there.
It will go around three times when you're
putting water with a speed.
It will go around three times at this speed and with this force.
And when it has gone around 3.73 times,
it will change direction for 1.7 turns.
And then it will go 3.7 times around.
And once again, it's a periodicity.
It's simply a periodicity with two components to it,
two changes of directions.
The first time, you're going this way.
And, oops, this fills up.
So you have your first change of direction.
And then, at some point, the balance
is such that you get your second change of direction
and you start the process all over again.
There is a pattern, a periodic pattern to it,
that just happens to have two components.
You've doubled the number of components in it
by putting more force in the system.
But once you understand that rule,
OK, this speed at this rate, with this force of water,
it's going to change direction at this point
for this length of time.
Then it's going to change direction again.
Knowing that, you can now sit here and be
told exactly how full, how fast, with what force.
And you could now tell exactly what
this water wheel is going to be doing 4,700 years from now.
It is still a reductive periodic system.
Now, you put in the water with even more force.
And what you begin to see is, as the wheel
is moving fast enough, it will have
sort of this first spin in this direction
and then it will change direction.
And because the buckets are now emptying out that much slower
compared to the rate at which the water is coming in,
it will change direction once more, and once more
back this way.
And you're back to your starting point.
In other words now, we have a completely periodic reductive
system that has four components in it,
four changes of directions before you
get back to exactly the starting point and do it all over again.
You have simply gotten a more complex version of a totally
predictable periodic system.
And what you see is, as you put in more and more water force
in there, you keep getting doublings of your periods.
You will now get spinning, where it
goes through eight changes of directions
before it starts the exact thing over again, and doing that.
And you can still predict 4,000 years
from now, 1632, all of that.
And throughout, you can be graphing
on a sort of way of representing it.
This is the simple system here.
That's the single rotation.
Here's when you get a first doubling.
Then it does something like that.
Here's when you're-- you get the point.
You can represent it that way.
And you see it is still, you let it keep running like this
and there will be the same periodicity, the same pattern,
that will go over and over for the rest of time.
It's still a reductive periodic system.
It's just gotten more complicated.
And then, somewhere in the doubling process,
something happens.
And the something that happens is
it becomes a non-linear chaotic system.
As you increase the force on the system, the force
here being the force of water coming in there,
at some point with the force of water increasing,
it's going to stop this perfect periodic doubling
of the components and it's going to shift over
to a chaotic pattern now.
How do you define that as a chaotic pattern?
It will shift over to a pattern of spinning
this way and then back for a while, and going then.
It will generate a pattern which never repeats.
There's no periodicity anymore.
It generates a pattern that is going to be infinitely
different along the way.
Because you're putting that much force in the system,
it has become chaotic.
And what is obvious here, as an implication, is knowing here
gives you no predictive value's ability
of what's happening 4,000 years from now.
The only way to know what's happening 4,000 years from now
is to study what the wheel does for 4,000 years.
You can't sit there and recognize a periodicity
and just do it over again and again.
And what the discovery of chaos was
about was that in structured, reductive, linear systems,
when you increase the amount of force on it,
there is a doubling and quadrupling and all of that.
It just gets more complicated and reductive.
That there is a transition point, where it suddenly
becomes chaotic and the pattern never, ever repeats.
And there is no predictability.
And sort of the founding generation of chaosists,
this is what they were showing, with things like water wheels,
where you can see the exact same thing.
You have a cylinder.
And what you're applying in here--
and it's filled with water.
And you're applying heat to the system.
And what you begin to get after awhile is convections
or whatever.
Stuff moves.
And as you heat it even more, changes direction.
It's the same thing.
And at some point, when the heat gets high enough,
it breaks into boiling.
It breaks into turbulence.
It breaks into a chaotic system, where there's no periodicity.
There is no repeating of these patterns.
And an amazing insight by one of the first people
in the field, this guy Yorke, was that any time you
see periodicity of an odd number,
you've just guaranteed that you've entered chaotic terrain.
That, as he called it, period three,
as soon as you're going instead of a single period,
a double, four, eight, whatever, as soon
as you see the first evidence assumes any system like this
begins to have three components before the pattern repeats,
it's about to disappear into a chaoticism.
So this is what a chaotic system is about, which
is you have a starting state.
And as you increase the force on the system,
the periodicity, the predictability, breaks down.
And eventually, you get as the critical thing,
a pattern which never repeats.
And thus, the only way to know what that pattern will
be doing x amount of time down the line
is to run the system from now until time x.
There is no predictability from here
as to what's happening at x.
You gotta sit there and march through it
because it's an aperiodic system, rather than one
like this.
So what the entire sort of starting point for chaosists
was, that you get these nonlinear systems.
And people had been noting them, mathematicians, physicists,
whatever, in systems like that for a long time.
And the longer they do, right around the point
that things would become chaotic,
they would say, well, this is just getting perturbed by now.
It's not functioning properly anymore
because it's not working in a linear, periodic manner.
Something's wrong with the system, something
along the lines of noise and variability.
We will stop studying it up to that point.
And if you say, we're going to stop studying it
until it gets to that point, the last bit of periodicity,
what do you come away with, a very distorted view that all
the interesting things in the world
work in reductive periodic systems.
Because what you've just done is say,
I'm getting totally disturbed by these nonlinear
chaotic things that happen at an extreme.
So I'm going to decide they are just anomalies.
And we're only going to study in this domain
and reach the conclusion that the entire world works
in this domain.
Kind of like behavior geneticists, who say, oh,
I want to understand the heritability of a trait.
And I want to understand it very cleanly.
So we're going to study it in only one environment.
Because if you study in a bunch of environments,
it gets noisy, and variable, and messy data.
No, it doesn't.
It is showing you that the heritability is zilch.
It's showing you that you have just artificially excluded
your ability to see what's actually happening.
And the founding generation of the chaosists
took the stance that what you've got
is all the interesting stuff about complex systems
out there, are all functioning out in the chaotic realm.
And what science has been spending forever doing
is looking the other way and pretending it's not there.
And restricting the studying of complex systems
to just these first baby step domains
of the periodic doubling.
Most of the world is doing this.
And most of science has worked very, very hard to ignore this.
So once you get this, you begin to get some really interesting
implications.
So now you find a way.
You get one of these chaotic systems
and you first study it when it is still
in the nice straightforward periodic way.
A little bit of water is coming in.
And it's turning like this, at a set speed.
And come back 4,000 years from now
and it will still be doing it the exact thing.
It's a great periodic system.
And you can come up with a graph of which direction it's
turning, would be here or here.
And how fast, with what work force, whatever.
And you will come up with a single dot, which
represents this rotating in this direction, at this set speed.
And this is this point of stability, this point
of complete predictability.
A feature of a periodic system like this,
when it's in this boring linear reductive way,
is you can mess with it.
And after a little bit of time, it
will settle back into the same system.
You briefly hold the water wheel and that throws things off.
And then you let it go and it goes back to what it was doing.
And it will take a little bit of time
for it to go back to where it started.
And a way of viewing this graphically
is it's doing this forever.
And now, you go mess with it.
You hold it.
You turn off the water for a second, whatever.
And for a while, it does this, and it does this,
and does this, and does this.
And eventually, it gets pulled back to this spot.
It goes back to this point of stability, of predictability.
It is attracted to this point.
And, thus, the linear systems like this have attractors.
Something where, when you mess with it,
the system will equilibrate and go back to where it was,
attracted to the "real" solution to the problem.
And if you are looking at it at any point here,
and it's not here, because it is here instead,
and it is here instead, and here instead,
all that is noise in the system.
And you're in the process of getting rid of the noise,
back to the pure, perfect state, the pure, perfect description
of how the system works.
So now, you look at what's going on when instead you've
got it to the point of chaos, a chaotic system.
And what you see is-- OK, let's assume that was
where the attractor was.
And what you see is when you're mapping
the speed, the direction that it's turning,
the force, all of that, it's doing this.
And it will do this for a while, and will do this.
And it will reach that critical point where suddenly it
changes direction.
And will do this for a while, and then it
will change direction again, and then this, and this.
And what you have is this butterfly wing pattern,
that became one of the iconic images in early chaos.
What do you have here?
You've got a description of how the system is working now.
Once it's hit this chaotism, it's
not settling down into a repeating pattern.
The fact that it is never here, and staying there,
that's the business that you could never predict.
It is constantly oscillating.
It is constantly chaotic.
So now you ask, and you say, well,
that's pretty strange because it's not actually
touching the spot.
But it just keeps going around it.
It's clearly pulled to it, but in a very different sort of way
than when you get a perturbation and quickly it does this.
This is being attracted back to this pure starting point.
And here, it never actually quite gets there.
But it's sort of being pulled by it.
What do we have here?
We have a strange attractor.
And that was the terminology that came into the field.
A regular old attractor is one that will pull down
to a single stable point.
This is the predictable, utterly predictable, state
of the system right now.
A stranger attractor is one that has to do with the fact
that it's going to oscillate like this.
But it's never going to settle down into a single point.
And suddenly, there's a very different implication there.
Because here, when you're not yet
at this spot, what's this spot?
It's noise.
Its variability.
And hang on and it's going to go away because it will eventually
reach the real answer.
In systems with strange attractors,
what do you make of the variability?
It's not noise.
It is the phenomenon.
There is no absolute pure answer in there.
There is not some idealized, the real correct answer.
And you're just fluxing around here.
And if only you had better control of the system,
you would eventually get it to look like this.
This is a myth.
This is imaginary.
In complex systems, there is no answer
as to what you are supposed to be observing
and everything else is variable noise.
This is the system itself.
A critical expansion on that, so you're looking at this
and you're saying, OK, what is this?
This is measuring in whatever units
of time, where the wheel is, what direction, what speed, all
of that.
It's a whole bunch of data points.
And the data points would just keep doing this forever
and ever, unpredictably.
Wait a second.
And you say, at some point it's got to cross here,
this spot here.
And at some point it's circling around
and will circle and come through exactly that point.
And right now at that point, if you apply the same equations,
the same determinist rules, right at that point,
the next point should be this.
And the next point should be this.
And what have you just done?
You're beginning to repeat yourself.
You've just had periodicity.
Wait, this really isn't chaotic.
As soon as it hits the same point that was there
previously, it suddenly should repeat the pattern
all over again.
It's periodic.
It stopped being a chaotic system.
How can this be?
Because they've got to touch the same points.
Look at all that.
And this was the next critical concept
in the field, which is you can look at this point and maybe
its coordinates, 6, 3, in a standard graph or whatever.
And that's what the coordinate was
the first time it was there.
And now, spinning around, it's just come there a second time.
It's back in the same spot.
Oh, no, it's repeating.
It isn't chaotic and unpredictable
and going on for an infinity.
And it just fell apart.
It doesn't really work this way, until you
look a little bit closer.
And you look a little bit closer.
And it turns out this is not 6 and 3.
This coordinate was actually 3.7.
And you look closer here.
And this one was 3.8.
In other words, it's not really in the exact same spot.
It never gets to the same exact spot again.
Where is it then?
Well, we really measured it now.
And, in fact, both of them are 3.7.
It's the exact same.
And look a little bit closer, an order of magnitude closer,
and there be it.
And take it out a million decimal places
and they still look like they're in the exact same point,
a million small places out in terms of accuracy.
And a million and one is where they will differ a little bit.
And thus, they're not in the same spot.
Critical next concept with this, which is if that's the case
and there are a million decimal places out there,
they are differing by one decimal place way out there,
what that means is the fact that one of them,
4,000 digits out there, is 8.2-- and notice,
an 8.3 and a gazillion zeroes before that-- that
means at some point this is going to function differently
than this.
This will produce a different spot than that.
They won't go to the same next place
because they're actually different numbers.
And if a million digits out, that tiny difference,
will change the functioning of that, a million minus 1 digits
out there, that will then potentially
change the functioning of a million minus 2 digits
out there, all the way up.
In other words, the consequences of this tiny little difference
gets amplified.
And this is what's called the butterfly effect.
In the standard sort of jargon in the field,
the butterfly effect is the fact that the way a butterfly flaps
its wings in Korea will change the weather system in Indiana.
And this is absolutely the case.
Because of these butterfly effects,
the very local consequences of something like a butterfly
flapped its wings versus if it hadn't flapped its wings,
would have you just done to air movement on the planet?
You are a million digits out there.
And you've just changed that this very last digit
went from 3 to 4 because the butterfly flapped its wings.
And that's going to cause a difference one digit
before that, and one digit.
And these are already beginning to differ.
And by the time it gets up to any level higher,
it's differing enough that the next spot will differ as well.
What are you doing?
This is why the pattern can never repeat
and why it's good to do this instead.
Because on some level of magnification
in a chaotic system like this, you never
have the exact same location, the exact same coordinates,
occur a second time.
Somewhere, however number of digits out there you
need to go, the two of them will differ.
And that difference can potentially amplify upward
in a butterfly effect.
If you do it that way, you suddenly
have a very different view.
Which is, all the way out, a gazillion decimal places out
there, and they differ like this,
this isn't noise in the system.
This isn't variability.
This is intrinsic to the system.
And the fact that this will now expand, amplify
the consequences, is why the whole system
is unpredictable because of these butterfly effects.
OK.
Let me just think about-- oh, so the critical point here
is in this strange attractor realm, not only is there
no predictability.
That's an important point.
And the closer you look, you will still
see the same degree of noise variability.
Noise is not something that goes away.
But almost philosophically, this critical point
in a system, a linear boring system with an attractor,
this is the answer.
In chaotic systems, there's no real answer.
And if you're out here, it doesn't
mean that you're not correct, you're not quite there.
There is no there there.
The notion that there is a solution at the center
is a fabrication of the data oscillating around there.
There is no correct idealized answer in there.
This is the idealized answer, which
is a completely unpredictable system.
OK.
What's intrinsic in this now is the fact
that even though you now look an order of magnitude closer,
there's still this variability stuff, which
can amplify, as a butterfly effect up,
and make a huge difference.
And you look an order of magnitude closer
and there's still a butterfly effect potentially.
And it doesn't matter how many digits you go down,
how closely you look, how good your reductive tools are,
the variability is still going to exist down there.
And the way to describe this here
is, thus, this is a scale-free system.
The nature of variability is exactly the same
if you're looking at a whole number
or if you're looking at a number taken out
to three decimal places or three googleplex places,
and that sort of thing.
That it's independent of how many steps down there
you're examining the system, the fact
that there will still be a difference
and it can still butterfly its way up
to make a difference there, means that all of this stuff
is scale-free.
It doesn't matter how closely you are looking at it.
In other words, the whole reductive philosophy
of the closer you look, the better your measurement
tools, the more variability is going to go away,
in a scale-free chaotic system, regardless
of what degree of reduction, of what degree of detail
you are looking at the system with, the amount of noise
is going to proportionally remain the same
because it's not noise.
It is the system.
So you don't have this reductive notion that all we need to do
is get better tools and look closer and closer
and noise will go away.
Because it isn't noise.
This is the phenomenon at any scale you look at.
And this introduces the notion, thus, of what a fractal is.
Because a fractal is a complex pattern, a visual pattern,
an equation that produces a pattern, things of that sort,
where it is scale-free.
The appearance of it is the same no matter
what scale you look at.
The complexity of it is the same no matter
how close you look at it.
The degree of variability is the same
because it's not variability.
It's intrinsic to the system.
OK, ways to define a fractal, because this has
becomes sort of a very trendy sort of subject.
And there's a number of different ways
to think about it.
Most formally, what a fractal is is information
that codes for a pattern.
Where, for example, it can code for a pattern that
is a line-- a line-- and thus is a one-dimensional object.
But where the line is moving around with such complexity,
with such an infinite amount of complexity, because even if you
look closer, it's going to be just as complex, proportionally
closer and closer.
In other words, this is going to be an infinitely long line
in a finite space.
Which begins to make it sound kind of more eventually,
this is more beginning to resemble
a two-dimensional object.
What a fractal is is some object, some property, that's
a fraction of a dimension.
If this goes on infinitely, it's a line.
But it's really much more than a line.
But it's not quite two-dimensional.
It's 1.3 dimensions.
It's a fractal.
A fractal is a system that has fractional dimensions to it,
where just the infinite amount of complexity
the closer you look, it's still going to be like this,
means that this is a line like no other line.
It's one that's infinitely long, packed in a finite space.
That's more than a line.
But it's not quite a two dimensional.
It's a fraction.
It's a fraction of a dimension.
That's the formal mathematical definition of a fractal.
For our purposes, it's instead, as well, no matter how close
or how far away you look at it, the amount of variability
is the same.
And thus, we have absolutely a classic fractal system
if these are canals on Mars or if these are the dendrites
of a single neuron.
No matter what dimension, with what resolution
you are looking at it with, the degree
of complexity, the degree of variability,
remains proportionally constant.
It's a fractal.
Bifurcating systems are classic fractals.
And the variability within the system
is constant regardless of what scale you are looking at.
And, thus, is telling you the variability
isn't noise variability.
It's instead, what the system is actually about.
So I will look here.
OK.
So you see these fractal properties.
The circulatory system is a fractal
with roughly the same degree of complexity
as is the pulmonary system in its branch points,
as in the dendrites of a single neuron,
as are the branches of a tree.
They're all fractals.
Their complexity, their variability,
is independent of scale.
This is what you begin to see in all
these physiological systems, these fractals that
have equivalent scales of complexity
at infinitely different, vastly different,
scales of magnification.
And as a hint of where we're heading on Friday, what that
begins to tell you is you can solve
this problem of coding for these vastly bifurcating systems.
Where this is made of a billion cells,
and this is a single cell, you can use
some are these similar rules.
And all the rule has to be is scale-free.
We will see exactly what I mean by that on Friday.
But this begins to solve the problem of,
there's not enough genes in there.
And what this introduces is the notion
of there being fractal genes, genes that give instructions
that are independent of scale.
And we'll see lots more about that on Friday.
So you've got these fractal systems all over the place,
where the point over, and over, and over again
is the variability isn't variability noise.
It is what the system is all about.
There is no absolute state, where the closer you get,
the more it suddenly is going to seem clean and nonvariable.
An example of this, an example of this
in the biological literature.
And this was actually a study I did about 15 years ago,
with probably the most obsessive undergraduate I've met in all
my years here at Stanford.
Which was great, because the study was only doable
because he was out-of-his-mind obsessive.
Here's what the study was about.
I was thinking about, well, all of this chaos, fractal stuff,
amid all of us functioning with a standard model
that, God, if only we could measure this down
to the single cell level, then we'd really
know what's happening, because that's going to be so much
better than blood values, because that's noisy working.
Working with that model of the mirror
reductive you get, the cleaner the data are going to be.
And then, here's this whole other world
of these non-linear fractal systems saying,
it shouldn't work that way.
So it struck me to do the study.
And what I wanted to do was study
the data generated in the scientific literature
at different scales of reductionism
and see what happens to the variability.
And the point here was to make it as, like, well controlled
as possible.
I felt for some subject, that was sort of Bio 150 related.
And came up with the notion that won't it
be interesting to look at what are the effects of testosterone
on behavior?
Just taking any such sort of question out of this course,
what are the effects?
And you can answer that on the level of societies.
OK.
People who are agriculturalists tend
to have different testosterone levels
than hunters, all of that.
How does that affect things like behavior?
You can ask that on the level of a single individual.
What does a person's testosterone levels
tell you about behavior?
You can ask on an organ system level.
What's happening to blood pressure
throughout the body and cerebral oxygen
delivery as a functioning system,
down to a single organ, what's happening to the brain,
down to a single cell or molecule?
All the way down, you see the logic of it.
So what we did-- and I use "we" in the,
like, most parasitic way possible-- what we did
was to go to the literature, the scientific literature.
And for a reason, we picked the literature, not
a contemporary one at the time, but one that was 10 years old.
And we looked at every journal out there
that we could come up with, that ever
had papers in the realm of-- that
could be interpreted as the effects of testosterone
on behavior.
Up from anthropology journals, comparisons
between different groups; down to people
doing X-ray crystallography on testosterone receptors.
And what this mad man I had hanging out
with me at that point did was go through every single one
of those papers.
And first classify it, is this an organismal one?
Is this a multiorganismal one?
Is this a cellular, is this a subcellular, all of that.
And then measure how variable were the data in that study.
This was a drag.
Because what he had to do was-- OK.
So there would be some figure in one of these papers,
looking like this.
And what this tells you is, for this group, here's the average.
And this is a measure of how much variability there was.
And this tells you there was a lot more
variability in this measure than this one, all of that.
You could come up with something--
and do not worry about the details here--
something called a coefficient of variation.
Which is, you ask how much variability is there
relative to the total size of this?
And thus, what you will get is, say, a circumstance,
if this is 100 units high; and in this case,
this is 10 units high; and in this case,
this is 50 units high.
In this case, your coefficient of variation would be 50%.
Your variance is half the size of the thing you're studying.
And in this case, the coefficient of variation
would only be 10%.
It's much less noisy data.
So what he did with his little ruler
there, in the next 3 and 1/2 years, with nothing else to do,
he went through these hundreds of papers.
And for every single figure, he measured what was the mean
and what was the error bar in every single figure.
And, thus, what was the coefficient
of variation for that piece of inflow of data,
for that figure, for that entire paper,
that would have eleventy different bars of data
in there?
And he's measuring away and going mad from this.
And eventually, what he could then do
was stick in the average coefficient of variation
in all of the papers in the organismal category,
and all the papers in the cellular category,
and all the way down.
Reductive science, what's the prediction?
As we go from the big organismal papers,
all the way down to the subcellular, submolecular ones,
the noise, the variability, the coefficient of variation
should be decreasing as you get more reductive.
That would be the traditional interpretation.
The chaotic fractal interpretation would be,
it's not noise.
It's not noise that you want to get rid of with better tools.
It is intrinsic-- I'm going to leave it
there-- oscillatory stuff, which is the system, rather
than the discrepancy from the system.
It would predict that the relative amount of noise,
the variability, the coefficient of variation,
shouldn't be trending towards decreasing.
There shouldn't really be a relationship
between what level you are examining phenomenon
and the amount of variability.
So an insane amount of work later,
this was his, like, what he spent the early 1990s on,
producing this one figure here.
[LAUGHTER]
This was it.
This was it.
He wept with pride and happiness when we finally saw this,
going from, this is the coefficient
of variation on all the data in all the papers that year
that were at the organismal level,
about an 18% coefficient of variation.
Organ system, single organ, multicellular, single cell,
subcellular, is there a trend towards variability decreasing?
Absolutely not.
It's not going anywhere.
It's remaining fairly constant.
Looking over scales of magnifications ranging
from societies, down to crystallography
on single molecules, the data don't get cleaner.
They don't get less variable.
Because it's a fractal system.
One additional possibility there was
that part of what was going in was you're
looking at the entire literature in that year.
And as we all know, some of those papers
are going to be kind of garbage and not very good science.
Maybe that's the noise in the system.
And there's enough noise that it swamps every single one
of these levels.
Here was the advantage that we had been looking at papers
published 10 years before.
You could now see how many times that paper was cited
in the subsequent 10 years.
In other words, you could find the papers
that were considered by people in that field
to be the really good ones, versus the ones that were junk.
Now if we do the whole analysis only on the papers that
were in the top 10 percentile of influence,
the best papers in the field, and it winds up
looking exactly like this.
It's a fractal system.
As you get closer and closer to measuring
what's really happening, wow, down
to the level of single molecules,
you don't get any cleaner data because it's a fractal system.
It's a chaotic fractal system.
So that was real interesting.
What was even more interesting was
after that, when we tried to publish the paper.
So got it together and we wrote up this paper.
And we sent it off to, like, one of my favorite neuroscience
journals.
And after a couple of weeks, the editor
wrote back, saying this is totally cool stuff.
This is really interesting.
This has really made me rethink some stuff.
This is very stimulating stuff.
I don't see what it has to do with our journal though.
So we really can't publish it.
So then I sent it off to my favorite endocrinology journal.
And two weeks later, back comes a letter
from the editor, saying, whoa, totally cool stuff.
Come over for dinner and bring that piece of paper with you.
But I don't quite see what it has to do with our field.
And marching our way up and down,
all the different relevant journals
in those different disciplines, and each time
they come back saying, whoa, isn't that interesting.
I can't wait to tell my friend, who
is the social anthropologist or the x-ray crystallographer.
But I don't see what it has to do with our particular field
here.
And we couldn't get it published in a journal that
specialized in any single one of these levels.
So ultimately, we published in this journal,
this sort of philosophical proceedings of medicine
and biology.
As far as I can tell, I was the first person under age 80
to ever publish a paper in that journal.
[LAUGHTER]
It's the journal of somewhat demented, senile,
elderly emeritus professors, who were now
writing their philosophical pieces because they're not
generating data any more.
I broke the age barrier on that journal.
And they published in there.
And in the years since, it has had,
like, zero impact on the literature in terms of anybody
quoting it, in terms of anybody citing it.
Actually that's not true.
There's this mathematician in Moscow.
This guy started writing to me about two months
after the paper came out.
And he basically said, this was the most wonderful thing
he had ever read.
And I had transformed his life, and he loved me.
And he's been writing about once every three weeks since.
His English is not very good.
Either he wants to adopt me or he wants me to adopt him.
I'm not quite sure in that.
[LAUGHTER]
But as far as saying, that's like the only person
who noticed that it there, showing
this point that this is, but what does it
have to do with our discipline?
So what we see here is a prelude to Friday, what fractals do
is blow apart the notion that get even more
reductive than they were back in the 1500s
and we'll get better data.
It doesn't get better because it's
the same degree of variability.
Because the variability is the-- whoa, where did that go?
The variability is the system, rather than
discrepancy from the system.
Fractals show that as well.
What we'll begin to see on Friday
is how you can now use fractal systems
to solve some of those problems of not enough neurons, not
enough genes.
OK.
So on first past, what did today seem to be about?
This endless trashing of reductive
science and, you know, that's how you fix a broken clock.
But the world of really interesting things
are like broken clouds and are non-linear aperiodic systems,
that are just as interesting and just as complex,
no matter what scale you look at them at.
Hooray, most of science makes no sense whatsoever.
Hooray for us, we are the vanguard.
OK.
That's a drag.
Because that really doesn't accomplish a whole lot
because what there has to be is a substitution.
So where is the actual predictability?
Where is the actual insight coming from?
And that's what Friday is about, which
is this whole field of complexity, emergence,
what we'll look at there.
But the last point here winds up being, OK, OK, terrific.
You've convinced me.
You have trashed linear additive periodic systems.
And 500 years' worth of books of science
need to be burned at the stake.
Is classical reductionism good for anything?
Yes.
We already know it is.
It's good for when clocks are broken.
No, no, no.
I mean is it good for anything in the realm of stuff
that we're interested in, in how, like, biology works,
in how behavior works, any of that?
And what you get is, it's very useful and very effective,
if you're not very picky, if you are not very precise.
An example.
There's a miserable disease out there,
that's wiping out people left and right.
And it's this viral disease.
And you're trying to figure out how to come up
with a vaccine for it.
And you finally come up with a vaccine.
And you start distributing it to people.
And what you see is exactly what Jonas Salk saw,
was that it did wonders for preventing polio.
But one in 560 kids, instead would
get a worst case of polio.
So you could now ask a very reductive question,
which is, is this vaccine, what happened in that one kid?
And what we'll see at that level is
if you're trying to ask that, that's not going to be.
If we understand what happened in that one kid,
we're going have to understand their individual cells, all
the way down, to get better and better numbers.
Because this OK, we've just entered the world
where it's actually a nonlinear chaotic system.
Where's the reductionism useful?
On the average, it's a whole lot better
that kids got this vaccine than they didn't get the vaccine.
You want reductive classical dead-right male reproductive
predictable science.
It's if you have a community of kids,
who get injected with this, versus a community that
doesn't, they're going to be healthier.
Don't ask me about one particular individual, let
alone one particular individual's immune system.
The reductionism breaks down there.
But if fancy, satisfying science for you counts as,
do they tend to be healthier than them, reduction is great.
That is sufficient.
Suppose your question is, well, is there
a certain time of the year, what's
the weather likely going to be in January versus in June?
You're never going to have reductive tools that
can tell you on any particular day what the temperature is
going to be three years from now.
But if all you want to know is, in general, it's warmer in June
than in January, reductive tools that exist now are sufficient.
And when you look at what people do in their research,
in the labs and places like this, in my lab,
all of that, when you sit there and you say, whoa,
we just learned and are trying to, like,
figure out the cure of some disease
by finding the mutation, whoa, that's
really a reductive approach.
And we just learned that's gibberish.
Whoa, everybody toss out what they do.
It's actually quite useful because you're not
very picky about what you want out of it.
My lab, for example, studies what
happens in brains after there's a stroke and trying
to figure out gene therapy stuff that you can do.
And we can't tell you why one rat out of eight
is not going to be helped by this procedure.
Whereas, three rats are wonderful, and so on.
Oh, I know.
Let's look at their are single molecules.
That's not going to do it.
Reductionism breaks apart.
But it's perfectly fine at the level that's useful here,
which is, on the average, is this something
plausibly that you might want to do to humans somewhere
down the line?
Most of what the science research is about--
and when you look at the labs around here
and you look at the labs you work
in, if those of you, who are lots of you, do research,
it's reductionism is a perfectly good thing
to use because you're not being too picky what-- you do not
want to come up with an explanation for how
every neuron in every developing grasshopper on Earth
bifurcates.
At this point, you want to know, in general, somewhere
around hours three to four after the egg
starts or the grasshopper parents meet and fall in love,
or whatever it is, that, in general, that's
when you begin to get differentiation here.
Your science is great.
So as long as most of what we're asking
is this sort of science, where you just kind
of a need to have a general predictive sense,
reductionism is just fine.
But nonetheless, underneath all of it, when you really
want to understand the systems, it's anything but reductionism.
And probably the most important philosophical point
is when you look at these interesting complex systems,
there is not a "the answer."
There is not a "the solution" to what is this water wheel going
to be doing?
And thus, all of us, who are out there, not quite
matching the perfect one, it is not
that we are being deviating from what the real answer, what
the real norm is supposed to be.
The variation is what it's supposed to be.
 OK, so we will pick up on the one topic that was not
covered from two days ago because you guys needed
to go play around with these cellular automata first.
So I will work with the assumption
that everybody here has now spent
48 hours playing with those.
But presumably because of the sleep deprivation,
you've forgotten much of it by now.
So we will cover some of it.
OK, back to that issue of fractals and butterfly
effects and that whole business that, by the time
you look at chaotic systems that are
determinist but aperiodical, that, when
they seem to be lines crossing, getting back
into the same spot, look closely enough
and they're not going to actually be touching.
And the centerpiece of why that matters
was that whole business of, these
both appear to be the same.
And take them out a decimal place
and they're actually different.
And a gazillion decimal places out.
And the entire sort of rationale for thinking in that way
is the notion that a very small difference here
can make a difference one step to the left.
And a million decimal places out there, a small difference,
will make a difference one before that.
In a scale-free way, a fractal, this here, a difference here,
a million decimal places out is just as likely
to have consequences for one over as this one for one
over fractal, scale free, all of that.
But the critical thing that is encompassed in this
is the notion that tiny little differences
can have consequences that magnify and magnify
and amplify into a butterfly effect.
So cellular automata are a great way
of seeing this principle along with a number of others that
are relevant to all of this.
OK, so we start off with the very first one.
And this is the one that you no doubt first
discovered is a pattern, which made you deeply happy.
And if you follow the rules, it was
starting there-- was this-- which way is this facing,
starting at the bottom.
OK, this is starting at the bottom.
And what you see is these very simple rules.
And out of it emerges a whole complex pattern.
And we'll be seeing shortly the features
of this that perfectly match what the requirements are
for emergent complexity.
But we'll see as the elements are lots of constituents,
lots of building blocks.
The building blocks being very simple.
They're binary.
Either they are filled or not filled.
Extremely simple rules as to how the next generation gets
formed.
And in terms of the extremely simple rules, none of the rules
have anything to do with other than the next generation.
It is all local rules built around what the neighborhood is
like for each one of these.
So you put it together, and out come
these very structured patterns like these.
And this is great.
This is very exciting.
Except this isn't what you usually get.
In most of these cellular automata systems, where
you start off with an initial condition and a simple set
of local neighbor rules for how you get reproduction
into the next generations, in most cases
the patterns stop after a while.
In the vast majority, they stop, they
hit a wall, they go extinct.
Aha.
Two terms that I've already stuck
in here that are biological metaphors
start to seem less metaphorical after a while.
First off, the notion that going from here to here to here
to here represents each next generation.
And the notion that, as we were just now,
that the vast majority of these cellular automata systems
go extinct.
They fail after a while.
So it's a very small subset.
What you then also see is-- in some ways
the critical point in this whole business--
is the relatively small number of starting states
that succeed produce a remarkably small number
of mature states that all look very similar to each other.
In other words, you can start with a whole bunch
of different conditions, and you will wind up
with a bunch of smaller number of stereotypical patterns.
Half of the cellular automata that
wind up taking off look something
like this with this pattern.
What are we seeing?
Convergence.
Convergence.
The notion that you can start with different forms and they
will converge over time.
What's this?
Well, you just proved you look at the mature form
and you can't know the starting state.
The other thing is, starting at the beginning just looking
at this line, there is no way you
can tell what it's going to look like 20 generations from now.
You've got to march through it.
In other words, the starting state
gives you no predictive power about the mature state.
This is a nonlinear system.
The cellular automata encapsulates
this, this business that most of these go extinct.
Only a relatively few number of mature forms exist.
It shows convergence.
Very different starting states can converge
into the same sort of patterns.
And minor differences in the starting state
can extend into very different consequences.
It shows, in other words, butterfly effects.
OK, so appreciating this a bit.
So what we did was then go to example number
two, where we changed the starting state
just a little bit here.
We shifted around some of the boxes.
And what you see is something that looks roughly the same,
but it's not exactly the same.
But it's the same general feel to it.
So that's great.
But then we started an exercise of starting off
with the initial boxes.
This goes that way.
The initial boxes evenly spaced with one space between them
and applied the rules from there.
And this is what you get.
Totally boring, static, inorganic, inanimate.
This is what it does for the rest of time.
What this exercise then did, going to number four,
is what if we now spaced two boxes
between each one of these?
And here we have an extinction.
This is one of those where it hits a wall,
and all the next lines are empty.
OK, how about three boxes in between the starting states?
OK, another form of extinction.
OK, how about four boxes between the starting states?
And suddenly, something very dynamic takes off.
Applying the same rules, and all you've done
is change the spacing between the starting states.
And look at, for one thing, how close this was to going extinct
up there on top, how asymmetrical the pattern is
that comes out.
And this particular one will stay asymmetrical forever.
And the ways in which that generated
something very unexpected.
There is no way you could sit there a priori
and say, hm, one box in between generates something that
looks inanimate.
Two boxes, not going to work.
Three boxes, yeah.
Somewhere around four boxes in between.
That's when dynamic systems suddenly take off.
There is no way to have known that
before without marching through this and actually seeing.
Starting state tells you nothing about the mature state.
Then we space it even further.
And what we get is something similar again.
This one is symmetrical.
It is somewhat different from the previous one,
but it's the same sorts of patterns
that come up over and over.
So what we've seen here is, by starting state,
minor differences, big divergence
between going extinct versus being a viable pattern.
Minor differences in starting state, big divergence
between symmetrical and asymmetrical patterns.
Tiny differences, butterfly effects.
OK, next.
Looking at the consequences here of introducing some asymmetry
from the very beginning.
The one on the left up on top has four boxes and four boxes.
It has eight boxes.
The one on top has eight boxes on the left, and the one on top
on the right, just adding in one extra box on the side,
so it's four and five.
Adding a little asymmetry, and what you see
is a very different pattern.
And one of the things you tend to see
in these pseudo-animate living pattern systems is starting
states of asymmetry produce more dynamic systems,
more dynamic patterns than even symmetrical ones.
That's one of the only rules that comes out of there.
So we're seeing now minor little differences producing
major different consequences.
Divergencies, butterfly effects.
Now showing this in a different way.
And what we've got here are four different starting state
conditions.
The one on the far left is, in fact,
the one from the previous one, the four and four.
Four different starting state conditions
where they're not enormously related to each other.
The first one against the other three, but the other three
have minor differences.
And the whole thing is, two of these
are identical after the first 20 generations or so.
This one and this one.
The two of them are identical, and for the rest
of the universe they will produce
the same identical pattern.
And looking at the mature state, you show up on the scene
somewhere halfway down, and you could never ever know
what the starting state was.
Did it start like this or did it start like this?
A convergency here.
And in this case, it's another one of those rules.
Knowing the starting state doesn't allow
you to predict the mature form.
Knowing the mature form, you don't
know which particular starting state brought it about.
And the only way to figure it out
is to stepwise go through the whole process
because you can't just iterate by a blueprint.
There is no blueprint.
Finally, the last one was giving you,
instead of different starting boxes
in each case with the same reproduction rule,
the last one was the same starting pattern
of boxes with different, slightly
different, reproductive rules.
And what you see here are totally different outcomes,
depending on which variant.
We have the beloved one on the top left.
And you see here, by slightly changing the nearest neighbor
rules, if and only if there is one
neighbor with this property, if and only
if there's two neighbors.
And working through that way, and you
see remarkably divergent outcomes for one thing.
You see that the majority of them
produce something very boring, either boring extinct
or boring repetitive in a very undynamic way.
Only a small subset produce lively, animated,
living systems.
So we're seeing a whole bunch of biological metaphors
here over and over and over, which is the starting states.
You don't know the mature, the mature,
you don't know the starting state.
The generations, very simple rules for generations,
going one to the next.
What we see also is the vast majority
go extinct and produce, either go extinct
or some repetitive, very boring, crystallized type structure.
A small subset, a tiny subset, produce,
instead, dynamic patterns.
And knowing what the starting state is is not
going to give you any predictability whatsoever of,
is this going to produce a dynamic pattern or not?
Nor does it allow you to look at a bunch of the starting states
and say, those two are going to produce
the same mature pattern.
And these are all properties of the evolution
of different living systems.
So you begin to see, OK, cellular automata.
Do you see some of these principles?
The simplest level out there in the natural world
is looking at all sorts of shells, seashells and tortoise
shells by the seashore and whatevers.
And they all have patterning on them
that is derived from that first cellular automata
rule, producing patterns that look a whole lot like these.
And go online and look for them because I didn't get around
to it in time, but producing all sorts of patterns in nature.
Very common ones.
What does that tell you?
Very simple rules for generating the same complex patterns
and different starting states, cellular automata
and properties here.
Another thing in a living biological system
that begins to suggest this.
OK, so I do this research in East Africa.
And every now and then over the years
I've gone to this mountain called Mount Kenya, which
is on the equator.
It's about 17,000 feet.
It's got glaciers up on top.
So this is an equatorial glacial mountain.
And you go up to about the 15,000-foot zone,
and there's like-- it's more land.
Almost everything is dead up there from the cold.
And there's basically only, like,
four or five different types of plants up there.
Oh, already a very small number that survive
in that environment.
And each one of them is very bizarre and distinctive
looking.
There's one of them that looks like
a little, like, rosebud thing, except it's
about 5 feet across.
And then there's another one that
has sort of a sprouty thing like this and then
a big central cactus-looking thing that isn't really cactus.
So there's a few of these really distinctive,
bizarre-looking plants.
And in some way or other, that's what
it takes to survive up there.
So I have this friend who does research up in the Andes.
And he does botany stuff up there.
And he goes into this one range there that is on the equator
and high enough that there's glaciers up there.
Ah, a glacial equatorial mountain on the other side
of the globe.
So one day I'm sitting around and looking
at some of his pictures there.
And suddenly I look and say, that's the exact same plant.
That's the big rosebud plant that is in Mount Kenya.
And oh, my god, that's the tall sprouty one.
And say, it's the exact same plant.
How can that plant be over there?
And we go rummage around in his botany taxonomy stuff,
and they are completely unrelated plants.
They are taxonomically of no connection whatsoever.
But what they've done is converged onto the same shape.
And in some mysterious way, if you're
going to be a plant growing on the equator at about
15,000 feet, there's only about four or five different ways
of appearing.
There is massive convergence.
And there's only four or five ways
that you can survive an environment like that.
You get organisms in very dry environments,
and there's, like, only four or five ways
that you can go about being an organism that's super
efficient at retaining water.
And those are the only ones you see amongst them.
Desert animals, and completely unrelated ones,
have converged onto some of the same solutions.
There's only a very finite number
of ways to do legs and locomotion.
Two is good, four, weirdo things that fly of six,
creepy things have eight.
You don't find seven.
You don't find three.
You find some of the solutions here are immensely different
starting states and have converged.
What we see is in these living systems over and over stuff
that look like cellular automata,
where slight differences magnify enormously butterfly effects,
where you are modeling living systems in a very real way.
Most of them go extinct.
Divergence, convergence.
And where each one of these you get the smaller number,
reflecting the fact that there's only a limited number of ways
of doing rain forest, temperate zone rain forest
in the Pacific Northwest.
There's only a limited number of ways
of doing tundra in Miami Beach.
There's only a limited number of ways.
In all of these, this convergence,
and always reflecting that these are cellular automata.
OK.
So hopefully you are now feeling desperately regretful
that you didn't spend the last few days doing this
because these are so heartwarming.
If you want to read a book that nobody in their right mind
should read, it's a book by this guy named Steve Wolfram, who's
one of the gods of computers and math
and was one of the sort of people who first developed
cellular automata.
And by all reports probably one of the largest
egos on the planet.
And he published a book, self-published it,
a few years ago, which he can because he
is grotesquely wealthy, from some of his computer programs.
And just showing what a low-key sort of humble guy
he is, he called the book A New Kind of Science,
just showing that he wasn't just going
from some little piddly new way of viewing the world,
but here was his new type of science.
And the book is about 1,200 pages.
And I suspect not even his mother
has read the thing it is so impenetrable.
And it sold a gazillion copies.
And almost all of them are sitting in people's garages
now, weighting down drain pipes because no one can actually
read this thing.
But an awful lot of what the book is about
are patterns in nature coded for by very simple local rules.
And the simple fact of that, you've
got a lot of very smart people doing this cellular automata
stuff.
And they can't come up with rules
where you could look at something beforehand a priori
and know this one is going to survive,
this one is going to go extinct, those two
are going to turn the same, these two
that differ by a slight smidgen are
going to turn out to be enormously different.
There's no rules for it.
And the book has all sorts of cool pictures
of a cellular automata looking things out in nature.
And go buy it for somebody's birthday
and see if they're not grateful for the rest of their lives.
But his whole argument there is, these
show ways in which you can code for a lot of the complexity
in the natural world with small numbers of simple rules.
This whole business of emergence.
This sets us up now for beginning
to look at some of the ways in which we
hit a wall the other day, ways in which the reductive model
of understanding the universe stops working after a while.
One version being the problem of not having
enough numbers of things.
Not having enough neurons to do grandmother
neurons beyond Jennifer Aniston, that whole business
that you simply don't have enough
neurons to do that beyond just the rare ones now and then.
And what do you get instead?
What has the solution turned out to be?
This field that people focus on now called neural networks.
And the point of neural networks is that information, again,
is not coded in a single molecule, single synapse,
single neuron, one neuron.
This neuron knows one thing and one thing only,
which is when there's a dot there, instead,
information is coded in networks,
in patterns of neural activation.
And just to give you an example, and this is
one that's in the Zebra book.
And anyone who is in Biocore I do this one,
and I do it because I at one point
learned the name of three impressionist painters,
except they're not coming to mind right now.
OK, so you've got two layers.
Here's what a neural network would look like.
A two-layer one.
These neurons on the bottom are boring, simple, Hubel and
Wiesel-type neurons from the other day,
where each neuron knows one thing and one thing only.
This one knows how to recognize Gauguin paintings,
this one recognizes Van Gogh, and this one Monet.
OK.
Each one of them is-- obviously there is no Hubel and Wiesel
neuron on Earth that's like that.
But just for our purposes.
They now project up to this next layer.
Note this neuron projects to one, two, and three.
This to two, three, and four.
This to three, four, and five.
So what does this neuron know about?
This one knows how to recognize Gauguin.
It's only getting information from this neuron.
It's another one of those Hubel and Wiesel type,
I know one fact and one fact only.
This one here is another one of those.
What does this neuron know about in the middle?
That's the neuron that knows how to recognize
Impressionist paintings.
That's the one that says, I can't tell you
who the artist is, but it's one of those Impressionists.
It's not one of those Dutch masters.
It's an Impressionist painting.
And this one does it because it is getting information that
is not available to these guys.
It is getting information at the intersection
of all these specific examples.
These ones, number two and four, those
are ones that recognize Impressionist paintings also,
but they're not as accurate at it as number three
because they've got less examples to work off of.
This is how a network would work.
And what that suddenly begins to explain
is something about the human brain versus a computer.
Computers are amazing at doing sequential analytical stuff.
Like, you get calculator things inside Cheerio boxes
that can do more things than the human brain can
do computationally.
But what we can do is parallel processing.
What we can do is patterns, resemblances, similarities,
metaphorical similarities, physical similarities.
And that's why you need networks like these.
You don't need neurons that know one fact and one fact only.
You need neurons where each one of them
is at the intersection of a whole bunch of other inputs.
OK, example.
So now suppose you've got a network.
There's one neuron which fires, and there's
a whole bunch of neurons sort of sending projections into it.
And this is a neuron for remembering
the name of that guy.
What was the name of that guy?
That guy, he was that Impressionist painter.
So suddenly your Impressionist painter network
is activating and firing at this neuron.
So it's sitting there.
So this is-- now you've got your whole Impressionist network
that's activated.
What was the name of that guy?
He was an Impressionist painter.
He painted women dancers a lot of the time.
So people who painted dancers.
But it wasn't Degas.
OK, so your "it's not Degas" circuit going in there.
And what was that guy's name?
God, I had that seventh grade art teacher
who loved this guy's work.
If I could remember her name, I would remember his name.
Oh, remember the time I was at the museum
and there was that really cute person who seemed to like it
and I had to pretend I liked this guy also
and it didn't work out nonetheless?
And going through.
And oh, what's the name?
There's that stupid pun about the guy, he's really short.
And something about the tracks being too loose.
Ah, Toulous-Lautrec.
And suddenly it pops out there, and you've
got enough of these inputs coming in there.
And this is tip of the tongue wiring.
This is how you may not be able to just remember
the guy's name.
Wait, he was the short guy with a beard who hung out
in bars and Parisian bars.
And here was that time in seventh grade.
And enough of these inputs, and suddenly out pops
the information.
And what this begins to tell you is,
this is ways of getting similarities.
These are ways of getting things that vaguely remind you.
This is a world where humans can now do stuff
like have a piece of music that reminds
them of a certain artist because they
both have similar coloration.
And that's something that makes sense to us.
That's something that can work because, what you then
begin to see is, every one of these neurons, this one,
for example, Impressionist neurons.
This one may also be at the intersection of another network
that's going this way, a network of French guys
from the last century.
And it may be part of another network of people
whose names are hard to pronounce
so you're anxious about saying them in a lecture.
Or the intersection-- and each one of these
is going to be an intersection of a whole bunch of these.
All of these networks, what does that do?
That's what you can do that a computer can't.
You see similarities, similes, metaphors.
And somewhere in there you get something really important,
which is the ones, the networks, that have wider expanses that
connect to a broader number of neurons
in a very simple, artificial, idiotic way.
That's kind of what creativity would have to be,
networks that are spreading far wider
than in some other individual.
It is literally making connections
that neurons in another individual does not.
And suddenly you have a world where everyone
knows this one is a face.
And it was only a limited number of people who ever
decided that this one's a face.
And in some level Picasso had a different network, a broader
one, as to what could constitute a face.
A broader network in some way is going
to have to be wiring that is more divergent.
And at the intersection of a bunch of networks
that are acting in a convergent way.
So what's some of the evidence that it actually
does work this way?
You go and you stick electrodes into neurons in the cortex,
and what you see, if the world was entirely made up of,
like Hubel and Wiesel, one piece of knowledge only, what
you would see is you would find neurons that each one responds
to one single thing.
All these grandmother neurons.
And instead, what you see by the time
you get to the interesting part of the cortex
past the first three layers of the visual cortex
and the first three layers of the auditory.
Once you get into the 90% that's called
the associational cortex-- and it's
called that because nobody really
knows what it does-- then what you see
are neurons that are multimodal in their responses.
All sorts of things stimulate them.
And here we have a neuron that's being stimulated
by a type of painting, by the knowledge of French guys,
by something phonetic, by all sorts--
and they're multiresponsive.
So that's what you wind up seeing.
The majority of cortical neurons,
when you record from them with an electrode,
they're not grandmother neurons.
They're at the intersection of a bunch of nets.
More evidence for this.
This was-- one of the grand poobahs of neuroscience
around the 1940s or so, a guy named Karl Lashley.
And obviously a very different time
in terms of thinking about specification of brain
function.
And what he did was a very systematic attempt
to be able to show where in the brain
individual facts were stored.
And the term for it at the time, this jargony term, was engrams.
He was searching for the engram for different facts.
And what he would show was, he would
destroy parts of the cortex in an experimental animal.
And he couldn't make the information disappear.
He would have to destroy broader areas.
And some of the knowledge, some of the memory
was still in there.
And he concluded in this famous paper
in the search for the engram that, according
to all the science he knew, there
could be no such thing as memory.
And the reason why was he was working
with a model of being able to-- there's
a single neuron where, if I could ablate it,
I should be able to now show in that rat
that it's just lost the name of its kindergarten teacher.
And instead, you see networks going on.
You see the same thing clinically in something
like people with Alzheimer's disease.
Early on in Alzheimer's, you will lose, in these networks,
you'll lose a neuron here or you'll lose a neuron there
when you're just beginning to lose neurons.
And what you see is, clinically, in people
with Alzheimer's, early on, it's not that they forget things.
It's not that memory is gone.
It's just harder to get to.
And you do this with all sorts of testing,
neuropsychological testing, where
you try to give the person cues to pull it out.
Example.
You're giving somebody, potentially with Alzheimer's,
a classic orientation test.
You ask them, OK, do you know the name of the president?
OK, they manage to get that.
Do you know the name of the last president?
No idea.
So now you give them a little bit of cuing.
OK, let me help you a little bit.
It's a one-syllable word.
Still not there, even though you've now
activated the one-syllable word network, obviously artificial.
Still can't say.
OK, let's make it a little bit easier.
It's things you could find in a park, in a city park.
So you're activating that.
No, still not coming out.
And then you give even more explicit priming there.
You give them a forced choice paradigm, is what it's called.
OK, so is it President Tree or President Shrub or President
Bench or President Bush?
Bush, Bush, the kid with the father also.
It's still in there.
It was still in there.
It just takes more work to pull it out.
What you're seeing there is not the death
of individual memories.
You're seeing a weakening of a network, a network that
is now taking stronger priming to pull it out of there.
And just to show how subtle network stuff can be,
here's something that would work with a lot of individuals
with early stage dementias.
What you do is another type of priming.
So you're eventually going to ask
them the name of the previous president.
And they first come in and you say, oh, great to see you.
Come on in.
What a beautiful day.
I walked here by way of the park.
The bushes were so beautiful this morning in the park.
Some of them had flowers, some of them didn't.
But bushes are so nice to look at when you're
walking through a park because bushes
are one of my favorite forms of [INAUDIBLE].
And then five minutes later, they
are more likely to remember the name Bush
out of a whole different realm of more subtle networks you're
tapping into.
So all of this is the beginning of a way
of solving the problem we had the other day of not
enough neurons for them to be grandmother neurons.
More solutions.
We then went to our next realm of trouble,
which was the problem of, there's not enough genes.
There's not enough genes in that specific realm
of explaining bifurcations.
And there can't be a gene that specifies, OK, this
is where you bifurcate if you were this particular blood
vessel and a different gene for this particular bronchial
and a different gene for this branch
of a dendrite and a single-- it can't work that way.
There are not enough genes.
What this introduces is the idea of there
being fractal genes, genes whose instructions
are ones that are scale free.
What do I mean by this?
OK, here's what a fractal gene might do.
So we've got a tube.
And this is a tube that's going to be part of a blood vessel
or a dendrite or a lung or whatever.
We've got a tube.
And the fractal rule here is, grow this tube in distance,
grow it until it is five times longer than it is wide.
The width, the opening, and that's the simple rule.
And the rule is, when it's grown five times longer, bifurcate.
So what's going to happen at that point
is just gone five times longer.
And it bifurcates at that point.
And what you've got is now, because this is split in two,
the cross-section is going to be shorter.
But you apply the same rule.
Now with the shorter cross-section,
you have the same rule.
Grow five times the length of that cross-section
until you split.
And what you wind up getting is, this
is one simple fractal rule that will generate the tree
patterns.
That the branchings get shorter and shorter,
the distances between the branch points
get shorter and shorter because the cross-sections are
getting-- one simple rule and you could generate
a circulatory system, a pulmonary system,
and a dendritic tree by giving a fractal instruction,
in this case, one that is scale free.
That is, independent of what the unit is here.
And this could work within the single neuron
or within an entire circulatory system.
So all of that's great.
That's totally hypothetical.
Ooh, fractal genes.
Well, you know by now that's got to translate
into a protein in some way or other.
How might this actually look in a real system?
So suppose-- OK, so a gene coding for a protein.
This is one copy of the protein, this is another,
this is another.
They bind to each other in a way so that they form a tube.
And they bind to each other in a way
that's just pure mechanical reality of, these are not
bits of information, these are actual proteins.
So it's going up in the tube there.
And suppose that the forces are, as the tube goes up
it gets more and more unstable.
And when the tube is high enough,
it gets unstable enough that these bonds
between the proteins begin to weaken, and it begins to split.
The splitting there is a function
of the length of these.
So it's split.
And now the next one has half the number
of proteins in this one, and thus it's that much weaker.
So you only have to go a shorter distance now
before it begins to split.
This doesn't exist.
It is no way it's like this.
But what you could begin to see is,
here's how you could turn a scale-free set of instructions
potentially into what it would actually
look like with mortar and bricks in terms of proteins.
How it might actually work.
Now the notion of fractal genetics, of fractal genes,
and fractal instructions begins to solve another problem,
and this is that space problem of how much stuff can you
jam into a space.
Here's the challenge here in terms of how dense things are.
In the body-- amazing factoid-- there is no cell in your body
that is more than five cells away from a blood vessel.
OK, you could see why you would want to do that.
But that is not an easy thing to pull off.
How do you do that with the circulatory system?
And amazing other factoid to factor in
with that is, the circulatory system comprises less than 5%
of your body mass.
How can this be?
You've got this system that's everywhere.
But it's taking up almost no space.
It's within five cells of every cell out there,
yet it's less than 5% of the body.
And, OK, forget it.
I'm not going to put that up.
But what this begins to-- OK, you convinced me.
So let's do this.
So what you begin to do is transition
to a world of fractal geometry.
You've got all your Euclidean world of nice, smiley, strange
things there.
You've got this whole world of shapes
that are constrained by classic Cartesian geometry and all
of that.
And what fractal geometry generates are objects that
simply cannot exist.
Here up on top, eventually, you will
see the first example of this.
And this is out of the Chaos book.
And this is this cantor set.
What you do is you start with a line.
Start with a line, and you cut out the middle third.
Now for those remaining two ones,
you cut out the middle third.
For those remaining four, you cut out the middle third.
And there it is.
And you just keep doing this over and over and over again.
And what do you do when you take it out to infinity?
What have you generated?
A set of an infinitely large number of objects,
lines, that take up an infinitely small amount
of space.
It's not possible for that to work, yet,
as you go more and more in that direction,
you get this impossible phenomenon
of something approaching having an infinite number of places
that something appears while taking up almost an infinitely
small amount of space.
And what this winds up being is, it's not quite a line anymore
at the bottom, but it's kind of more than a dot.
It's somewhere between one and two dimensions.
It's a fractal.
Its dimensional state is somewhere
one point something or other.
It is somewhere between dots and a line,
and it does this impossible thing,
which is it's everywhere without taking up any space.
Or you could then push it to the same thing
in the next dimension.
And this is this Koch snowflake.
And it's the same sort of rule.
You start with the triangle there.
And the rule is, you take the middle third
and you put a little triangle out of it.
And then take the middle third of that
and put a little triangle out.
And a middle third.
And you just keep doing it forever and ever and ever.
And you wind up with something that is impossible,
which is an object that has an infinite amount of perimeter,
an infinite amount of surface area, within a finite space.
That's impossible.
But it begins to approach this.
And what you see here, this is a way
of just iterating over and over and over to jam
a huge amount of surface area into a tiny space.
And thus it's somewhere but different, sort of like a line,
but it's sort of like a plane by then.
And it's got a fractal form somewhere
between two and three.
It's got a fractal quality of two point something or other.
It's an impossible object that is solving
this problem of being-- in another version,
having surface area everywhere without taking up any space
and being within a finite area.
Next, finally, this Menger sponge,
which is the same exact concept.
Again, you start with the box up there, or the ring,
and you take out the middle third
of each of those segments.
And then you take out the middle third
of each of those segments.
And if you are doing this with what starts off
as a three-dimensional cube, eventually you get something
that cannot exist, which is an object that has an infinitely
large amount of surface area while having no volume.
That's what it produces at the extreme.
And we got something here that's somewhere between two
different dimensions, a fractal again.
And what you see is, this is how the body solves the packing
problem.
Because all you need to do is make the circulatory system,
the circulatory system some version of this,
some version of splitting the ends of the capillaries
over and over and over or making the lungs, with their surface
area for exchanging oxygen, looking something like this.
And this is how you generate a system that
is everywhere and taking up virtually no space.
Obviously, it's not taken out to infinity.
But this is how you can have a circulatory system that's
five cells away from every cell in the body,
yet takes up less than 5% of the body.
This is a fractal solution.
All you do here to generate these
is taking some of these qualities
over and over and over and over, and you
can begin to produce absolutely bizarre, impossible things
in terms of surface area and perimeter and volume
and all of that.
This is how you can use a fractal system
to solve the packing problem.
Now of course, as soon as you're coming up
with the notion of something like fractal genes,
you, of course, have to consider the possibility of there
being fractal mutations.
What would a fractal mutation look like?
And again, most people, most geneticists
and molecular people, do not think
about this in these terms.
But there are people who do who actually talk about things
like fractal gene mutations.
What would it look like?
Suppose you've got a mutation, and it produces a protein
that's slightly different.
And as a result, its got bonds here
that are slightly weaker between different proteins.
So on a mechanical level, what have we just defined?
This is a tube that's going to grow these proteins where
it's a shorter distance before it begins to split.
Because these bonds between them are not as strong.
There is a mutation now where, instead
of growing five times the cross-section, maybe
you're growing 4.9 times the cross-section.
And thanks to that mutation, the entire branching system
is going to be compacted a bit.
It's not going to reach the target cells.
And these would be catastrophic mutations where
the pulmonary system doesn't develop,
the circulatory system doesn't develop.
And what you would see in those cases is,
the mutation is something that has consequences
that are scale free.
Another hint when you see some fractal gene mutations are
a small number of diseases that they're
about spatial relationships in the body.
For example, there's a disease called Kallmann syndrome, where
you get stuff that's wrong with midline structures in the body.
Something is wrong with the septum
between the nose, the nostrils.
Something is wrong in the hypothalamus.
Something is wrong in the septum of the heart.
This is not three different mutations.
This is some sort of fractal mutation messing up
how that embryo did symmetry, how the embryo does
midline structures.
So you begin to see ways here in which
you can solve this and, within the biological metaphor,
where you could begin to get solutions for these problems
and also mutations that can put you up the creek.
OK.
So that is another realm for beginning to solve this.
Another domain.
And here we begin to move into the realm of emergence,
emergent complexity.
Which we will first look at a couple of crude passes at it.
First, emergence driven by biophysical properties.
And do not freak out if you don't
know what I mean because I have no idea what I mean by that.
So I will explain in a more accessible way.
And this was something that was explained endlessly
by a guy who used to be in the bio
department, a developmental botanist named Paul Green, who
died about 10 years ago way too young from cancer.
He was a really good guy.
He would give this famous lecture
where he would start off and he would
describe some sort of disk.
And the point is that the disk, the material inside
was of a softer material than the material on the perimeter.
And he'd be putting up math at this point
that I didn't understand.
But it was sort of a disk like that.
And then he would show that what happens if you heat the system.
What happens if you put heat on a disk like this?
And what he would wind up showing,
going through agonizing amounts of math,
is that, when you heat a system, the only solution
for this system that's trying to respond to the heat
but in different ways on the perimeter versus the inside
is to come up with a double saddle, a double saddle shape.
And the math proved this.
And I had no idea what he was talking about when you come up
with a double saddle shape.
And then what he says is, so that's how
you get a potato chip.
You take a slice of potato, where
there is more resistance on the perimeter
and less on the inside, and you heat it.
And the only solution to the problem
is to come up with a double saddle potato chip shape.
And if you change the outside, the force of it,
if you take one of those great organic,
"give you the runs" type potato chips,
where it's going to have the skin left on the outside,
it's going to be a somewhat different-shaped double saddle.
Because there's only one solution
mathematically to that.
And then you sit there, and you deal
with a very simple, important fact,
which is, that slice of potato knows no biophysics.
That slice of potato didn't fit.
There's no gene that instructs potatoes
to respond to heat in this way.
This was the inevitable outcome of the biophysical properties
of a slice of potato.
And what he then shows is, in plant systems
after plant systems, they develop
where two shoots come out this way
and a little higher up two shoots
this way and two this way and two this way.
They're all double saddles.
And this winds up being a mathematical solution
to a packing problem there.
When plants are growing their stems,
there is no gene specifying it.
You don't need genetic instructions.
It is an emergent property of the physical constraints
of the system.
Another example here that's sort of proto-emergent, somewhat
simpler versions, this phenomenon
of wisdom of the crowd.
And this is one that was first identified
by Francis Galton, who was some relative of Darwin
and started eugenics and was bad news in that regard
but famous statistician.
And being an Englishman somewhere in the 19th century,
he spent huge amounts of time going to state fairs and county
fairs or whatever.
And he was at this fair one day where
they had some oxen up there.
And they were having a contest that, if you could guess
the exact weight of the oxen, you would
get to milk it or something.
I don't know what the prize would be.
And there were hundreds of farmers
around filling out little pieces of paper
where they were guessing.
And what he discovered at the end
was that nobody got the answer right.
Good.
So the owners of this get off easy
without having to give up any of their oxen milk.
But he then did something interesting.
He collected all the little slips of paper,
and he averaged all of them.
And it came out to the correct weight within an ounce.
In other words, no individual in that group
had enough knowledge to be able to truly accurately tell
what this thing was.
But put them together in a crowd,
and out comes the right answer.
Another version of this.
And this one is deeply important in terms
of Western intellectual tradition.
Back to-- is that program Who Wants to Marry a Millionaire?,
does that still exist?
[INAUDIBLE]
In reruns?
In-- OK, so it was this one.
They give you questions, and if you answer them
they give you money and it's great.
And at various points, if you're stumped you've got three things
you could do.
One is, they could eliminate-- you've got four choices.
They can eliminate two of them to make
it a little bit easier for you.
Another is, you have this expert who you can call up.
And the third option is to ask the audience what
they think is the right answer.
And all the audience there has these little buttons,
so they can choose A, B, C, or D of the multiple choice there.
And what the logic is supposed to be is, cut it down to two.
Your chances are better if you have to guess.
Talk to your wise expert, who's sitting by on the phone there.
And they're going to be wise and be able to hopefully answer
this question.
Or ask a whole bunch of people.
And they would all vote.
And any smart contestant would choose
whatever the audience chose.
Because, when the audience was asked, 91% of the time
they got the right answer.
They got the majority of people voting for the right answer.
And this is more wisdom of the crowd.
And this was a much better hit rate
than whoever the expert was on the other side of the phone.
One person could be extremely expert,
but they're not going to be as expert
as a whole bunch of somewhat decent experts thrown together.
This is the notion behind a field called prediction markets
where what you do is you are trying to predict some event.
For example, the Pentagon is very
interested in using prediction markets
to try to predict where the next terrorist attack might be.
And what you do is you get a whole bunch of experts,
and you ask each of them to think about whatever
the parameters are and take a guess as to how long it will
be before the next one occurs.
And what you do is, you average them up
and assume there is a wisdom of the crowd thing going on.
And that will give you lots of information.
Great case of this a few years ago.
There was some submarine or something
that sunk somewhere out in the Pacific, in the ocean.
And nobody knew where it was, but they kind of
knew where the last sighting, the last recording,
was from it.
But they had a whole bunch of naval experts.
And they had all of them sort of bone
up on the knowledge of what was the water temperature and wind
speeds and where they were on the last sighting
and what was on TV that day or whatever.
They got all the information, and each one
made a guess as to where it would be on the map.
And you put them all together.
And they had guesses covering hundreds
of square miles of ocean floor.
And they put it all together, and they came up
within 300 yards of the right location.
So what we have over and over here is this business of,
put a lot of somewhat decent experts together on a problem,
and they will be more accurate than almost any one single
amazing expert at it.
Under a few conditions.
The collection of these partial experts can't be biased.
Or if they are, they all have to be
biased in a random scattering of directions.
And they need to really do be somewhat expert.
If you get a whole bunch of people
off the subway in New York and ask
them to guess the weight of the oxen,
they are not going to wisdom of the crowd their way
into being able to milk the thing afterwards.
You've got to have people who have some experience with it.
And you wind up seeing wisdom of the crowd
stuff going on in all sorts of living systems.
For example, here is an ant colony.
And here's a dead ant.
And they're trying to get the dead ant back
to the ant colony.
And when you look at these things,
they know how to get it, or they get some dead beetle
or something to eat, and a whole bunch of ants
push it over back to their colony.
Oh.
Does each one of them know exactly where
they should be pushing?
No.
What you have instead is, each ant
has somewhat of the right idea as to where
they should be going.
And there are more ants that have a reasonably accurate
notion, a smaller number that are somewhat off,
and a really small number that are way out of whack
because in general ants are kind of experts
at finding ant colonies.
They're pretty informed.
And what you do is you put them all together
and you do this vector geometry stuff.
And it moves perfectly in that direction.
And no single ant knows exactly where the colony is.
You've got a wisdom of the crowd thing here going on.
OK.
Where are we?
Five-minute break.
If you have a chance, could you email me that website
so we could post it in the CourseWorks?
That's great.
OK, picking up.
So now we are ready to take some of those building
blocks, wisdom of the crowd stuff, biophysical potato
chips, and begin to see it more formally
in this field of emergent complexity.
What is that about?
What we've already alluded to.
It's systems where you have a very small number of rules
for how very large numbers of simple participants interact.
What's that about?
Here's what emergence is about.
You take an ant and you put it on a table top
and you watch what it's doing and it
makes no sense whatsoever.
You take 10 ants and do it and none of them make any sense.
You put 100 and they're all scattering around.
And somewhere around, I don't know, 1,000 ants or so, they
suddenly start making sense.
And you put in 10,000 or 100,000 or whatever it is,
and suddenly, instead of some little thing wandering around
aimlessly, you suddenly have a colony
that can grow fungi and regulate the temperature of the colony
and all these things.
And suddenly, out of these ants emerges
an incredibly complex, adapted system, an adaptive one.
And the critical point there is, no single ant
knows what the temperature should be in the colony.
Or if this is time to go out foraging
in this direction instead of that direction.
It all emerges out of the nature of ant interactions.
You've got very simple constituent parts.
An ant, much like one box that's filled
in the cellular automata.
You've got very simple rules for how
they interact with each other.
Ants have, I don't know, maybe 3 and 1/2 rules.
Don't tell Deborah Gordon in the department, who's
an ant obsessive.
But that I may be inadvertently dissing the ants.
But they have a small number of rules as to how they interact.
If you bump into an ant and you do this with the pheromones,
you go this way, and if you go that way.
And I'm just making it up.
They have a small number of rules.
And as long as you've got a lot of ants doing this, out of this
can emerge hugely complex adaptive patterns.
And this is what an emergent system is about.
Simple players, huge numbers of them,
simple nearest neighbor rules.
And you throw them all together, and out comes patterning.
And there is no single ant that knows what the blueprint is,
and there's no blueprint.
There is no plan anywhere that says
what the mature form of the colony should look like.
There are no instructions.
It is bottom-up organization rather than top down.
And you see all sorts of versions, then,
of emergent complexity built around, again,
lots of elements of things with a small number of very
simple rules about how neighbors interact with each other.
We need that board.
OK.
Here we have two, four, six, eight different cities
or eight different places where ant
can find good food or eight different something
or others, eight different locales.
And you were trying to do something efficient.
You need to go to each one of them to sell your product
or to see if there's good food there or not.
You need to go to all eight of them,
and you want to do it as efficiently as possible.
You want to find the way to have the shortest possible path
to go to all of these places.
And this is the classic traveling salesman problem.
And nobody at this point can solve it.
There's no formal mathematical solution.
And by the time you get to, like, eight locales,
there's, like, hundreds of billions of different ways
you can do it.
So how can-- you can't come up with the perfect solution.
But you could come up with maybe kind of a good, decent one.
There's two ways you could do it.
First is to have an unbelievably good computer that just,
by sheer force, cranks out a bazillion different outcomes
and in each case measures how much you're doing it.
And you can get something close to an optimal answer.
The other way of doing it is to have yourself
some virtual ants in something that is now
called swarm intelligence.
Here's what you do.
You need to have two generations of ants.
The first generation, you stick them all down,
different numbers of them, and they all
start off in these different cities,
these different locales.
And their rule is, each one of them goes to another city.
Each one of them goes to another destination.
But here's the follow-me rule.
The ants are leaving a pheromone trail, pheromone trail,
and they stick their rear end down.
What is it?
Head, thorax, abdomen.
And they stick their abdomen down.
And they've got a gland at the bottom
there, which releases a pheromone
and makes a track, a scent track, of the pheromone there.
And a very simple rule, they have a finite amount
of pheromone in there to expend on the entire path they're
making.
In other words, the shorter the path,
the thicker the pheromone trail is going to be.
Now what you do is deal with the fact
that the pheromones dissipate after a while.
They evaporate.
And thus, the thicker the path, the longer
it's going to be there.
You now take a second generation of virtual ants,
and you throw them in there.
And what their rule is, they wander around randomly.
And any time they hit a pheromone trail,
they join the trail one way or the other,
and they lay down a pheromone trail of their own
with their abdomen.
They reinforce the markings on this trail.
And let 10,000 virtual ants do that
for a couple of hundred thousand rounds of generations,
and they solve the traveling salesman problem for you.
Because it winds up being, the short paths,
the more efficient ways of connecting locales,
will leave larger, thicker trails,
which are more likely to last longer and thus increase
the odds that an ant wandering around randomly
will bump into it and reinforce it.
And what you see is, initially, there
will be every possible path.
And as you run this over and over,
it will begin to fade out, and out will
emerge the more efficient ones.
You can optimize the outcome doing it this way,
just asking virtual ants to do it for you.
And this is exactly how ants do it out in the real world.
When they're foraging in different places,
there is a first wave of them that comes out,
and they go to locales leaving scent trails.
And then there are the wanderers that come in,
and when they hit a trail they join it.
There are now telecommunications companies that use swarm
intelligence to figure out what's the shortest length
of cable they need to use to connect up eight different
states' worth of telecommunication towers,
whatever they're called.
And they can sit there and do math
till the end of the universe trying
to figure out the cheapest way to wire them up.
Or they can use swarm intelligence.
And that's what a lot of them do at this point.
It works.
What are the features of it?
This is not wisdom of the crowd.
This is not that every ant knows a solution to the traveling
salesman problem, except none of them have the perfect solution.
But put them all together, and they all
get to vote on outcomes.
The ant don't know from traveling salesman problems.
The ant knows nothing about trying to optimize this.
All the ant knows is one of two different rules.
If I'm walking from one of these to one of these,
the longer I walk, the thinner the pheromone trail.
Or rule number two, if I stumble into one of these,
I join it and put down my markings there.
Two simple rules, one very simple type
of sort of unit of information in there, an ant.
And all you need to do is make sure there's enough of them,
and they solve the problem for you.
This winds up explaining another thing.
How do bees pick a new nesting site?
A bee's nest, a bee's-- hornet's nest, a bee's nest.
Every now and then the bees need to leave and pick
a new place to live.
And how do they figure out the good place?
And there's all sorts of criteria of nutrients.
And so all sorts of bees go out there, and what they do
is they look for food sources.
And they look for a place that will have a lot of food.
Maybe that's a place to go and move the colony.
So we know already, the bee will go out and find its food there,
its food source.
It will come back in.
And here's the colony cut in cross-section.
And what you wind up having is this ring of bees.
Here is the entry.
And you have the bee dancing going on
that we've heard about in the middle of the dance floor
there.
And we've already heard it's this pattern of this figure
eight while shaking the rear end.
And we know what the information is,
which is the angle tells the direction to go out there.
And the extent to which it's wiggling
its rear end is how long you're supposed to fly for.
But the final variable is, the better the resource,
the longer you do the dance.
So you've got bees coming in from all over the place that
have found good resources, that have
found so-so ones, all of that.
And so there's bees doing all this dancing stuff here
of different durations.
And the ones who have found the good solution
to where do we want to live are dancing longer.
The ones who have found the most efficient path
are leaving a message longer.
So now you bring in your second generation.
And the rule is among bees, if they
happen to bump into a bee that is doing a dance,
the bee responds and goes where it tells you to go.
So a bee may randomly sort of bump into one of these guys
and then off it goes.
Actually, I'm sure it's more complicated than this,
but it's along the lines of there's now
random interactions.
If one of the peripheral bees encounters, bumps into,
one of these bees that has information,
it joins in in that bee's group.
And it then goes and finds the food resource
and comes back with the information.
So thus, by definition, if you have found a great food source,
you're going to be dancing longer,
which increases the odds of other bees randomly bumping
into you, which causes them to go and find the same great food
source and come back and dance longer.
And the ones with lousy ones are coming in and dancing
very briefly, and thus there is hardly any odds
of somebody bumping into them.
And what you begin to do is, you suddenly
optimize where the hive is supposed to go.
Again, it's not wisdom of the crowd.
It is an emergent feature of one generation with information
based on some very simple rules, and one information
that generates some random element
and out comes an ideal solution.
More versions of this.
Another domain where some very simple rules out of it
emerges something very complex and adaptive.
OK, so the themes here are two generations,
the more adaptive the signal, the stronger it is
and the longer it lasts.
And then the randomization element.
Another theme that comes through in a lot of emergence, which
is to have your elements in there, your ants,
your bees, your traveling salesmen,
whatever the constituents are.
And now what the rules are are simple rules
of attraction and repulsion.
Which is to say, some of the elements
are attracted to each other, and some of the elements
are repulsed by each other.
Some are pulled together, some are pushed apart
like, for example, magnets.
Magnets are polarized in the sense
that magnets only have two ways of interacting
with each other, simple nearest neighbor rules.
They're either attracting or repelling,
depending on the orientation.
So here's what you do now.
You take a system and something very simple.
You've got some simulated SimCity sort of thing
where you're letting the system run to design a city.
You want to do your urban planning in your city
that you're going to construct there.
And what you do is, you can sit there
and you can study millions of laws about zoning and economics
and all of that to decide something very simple.
Where are you going to put the commercial districts?
And where are the residential districts going to be?
Or you can have just a small number of simple rules.
Which is, for example, if a market appears
in some place, what it attracts is a Starbucks.
And what it also attracts is a clothing store
or some such thing.
So a bunch of rules.
But then you have repulsion rules,
which is, if you have a Starbucks,
it will repulse any other Starbucks.
So the nearest other Starbucks can be this far away.
If you have a competitor's market,
it can't get any closer than this.
That sort of thing, these simple attraction/repulsion rules.
And what you wind up getting when
you run these simulations are commercial districts in a city
where you get clusters of commercial sort of places that
are balanced by attraction and repulsion
where you have thoroughfares connecting them.
And the more elements there are in the two neighborhood
commercial centers, the bigger the connection is going to be,
the bigger the street is, the more lanes, the more powerful
the signal coming through there.
And you throw it in.
And out pops an urban plan that looks
exactly like the sort of ones that the best
urban planners come up with.
And all you need to do instead is run these simulations
with some very simple attraction and repulsion rules.
So you do that, and it winds up producing stuff that looks
like cities.
You do that with a bunch of neurons.
You take a Petri dish, and you throw in a whole bunch
of individual neurons.
And they have very simple rules.
They secrete factors which attract some types of neurons.
And they secrete factors which repel other types of neurons.
And all of them are having some very simple rules.
When I encounter this, I grow projections
towards where it's coming from.
If I encounter that, I grow projections
in the opposite direction.
Simple attraction and repulsion.
And what you do is, at this point,
you throw in a whole bunch of neurons, each one where
you throw into a Petri dish.
And at the beginning they're all scattered evenly all
over the place.
And you come back, and you come back two days later,
and it looks just like this.
You have clusters of neurons sending projections,
and you have all these empty residential areas in between.
And if you just mark this in a schematic way, looking
from above you're not going to be able to tell,
is this the commercial districts in a big city?
Or are these neurons growing in a dish?
And you get areas of nuclei of cell bodies and areas
of projections, and it winds up looking exactly like that.
And amazingly, there was a paper in Science earlier this year.
And it was looking at one of these versions,
again, in this case attraction and repulsion
rules with ants' colonies setting up foraging paths.
And they explicitly compared one colony
to the efficiency of the distribution of the train
stations in the Tokyo subway system.
And what they showed was very similar solutions,
but the ants had gotten a more optimal one.
And the subway system had people sitting there salaried
to figure out the best way to do it.
All the ants had were very simple rules
of, if it's someone from the other colony I stay this way,
if it's someone from mine, simple attraction
and repulsion.
And out comes something that looks like this as well.
So here you see that happening with a remarkably small number
of rules.
Now you put it into a really interesting context, which
is something we bumped into back when first introducing proteins
and DNA sequence equals shape equals function, all of that.
Molecules have charges on them.
Some of them were positively charged, some of them
were negatively.
Whoa.
Attraction and repulsion.
Positively charged molecules are attracted
to negatively charged ones.
Same charged ones repulse.
Here we have a system with very simple attraction and repulsion
rules.
And that's the logic behind, when one thinks about it,
one of the all-time important experiments, something
that was done in the 1950s by a pair of scientists, University
of Chicago, Urey and Miller.
Here's what they did.
They took, like, big vats of organic soup
stuff that just had all sorts of simple molecules in there.
Little fragments of carbon, carbon, little fragments
of-- all sorts of inorganic molecules in there,
little ones in there, floating around in this organic soup.
And what they did was they would pass electricity through it.
And they did this vast numbers of times.
And eventually what they saw was,
they would come back and check, and these random distribution
of these things, of these little fragments,
had begun to form amino acids.
Whoa.
Metaphor.
The organic soup, just the evenly distributed sort
of world of potentially organic molecules
in a world in which electricity passes through, lightning.
What had these guys just come up with?
Some in your, like, kitchen sink experiment
of the origins of life.
And what people have done subsequently is show,
you don't need the catalyst.
There's a whole world of researchers
who study origin of life.
And the basic notion is, you put in enough simple molecules
in there that have attraction and repulsion rules,
and you get perturbations and spatial distributions
of certain ways, and they will begin
to form rational structures after a while.
Here's another version of this.
And I used to do this in class, except I can never
pull this one off, and it just became chaotic.
Kid's toy, you've got these magnets.
You either have-- you have magnets like that.
And then you have little metal balls that
can go onto the magnet here.
And you've got vast numbers of them.
And you can piece them together.
Whoa.
This is starting to look kind of familiar here.
So we have these constituents with very simple rules, which
is the magnets repel each other.
They bind.
These things.
And here's what you would do.
Here's what I would attempt to do.
First off, I would get somebody to show me
how to get the video thing on here to project it.
But you would put up a whole bunch of these magnets in rows,
not too close to each other, nice and symmetrical.
And what you do then is you take a handful of the metal balls
and fling them in there.
And if you do that 400 or 500 times,
eventually they will bounce around.
And amid all the pieces flying, you're
going to get a pyramidal structure like this.
One of those just like that, it's three dimensional,
you know that.
You are going to get one of those that will simply pop out
of this because that's the nature of potato chips solving
their math problem with double saddles.
That's the nature of throwing a whole bunch of elements
with simple attraction and repulsion rules.
And given enough chances, throw in enough perturbations there,
and structures will begin to emerge.
And it's the same exact principle there,
these same ones over and over.
So we've got some very simple versions where
you get emergent complexity.
One is this version of a first generation
has directed searches and the intensity
of the signal that it leaves afterward
is a function of how good of a search
they've done, random wanderers.
Then you have the attraction/repulsion world
of putting these together, lots of elements.
And you begin to get structures out of it.
Next version of this, or next domain
of where you begin to see the fact that these rules are
underlying an awful lot of things.
Suppose here you were studying earthquakes.
And apparently there's just, like, little earthquakes going
on 20 times an hour or so all down on the Richter
scale of, you know, one quarter or who knows what.
But you get enough of these, you get a huge database,
and you can begin to graph the frequency of Richter 1.0
earthquakes and how often do you get the Richter 2.0 and Richter
3.0 and all of that.
And you graph it.
And it's going to look something like this,
a distribution like that, which is obviously
there's a huge number of number one categories.
And it drops off until the extremely rare at this end.
There's a distribution, which mathematically
can be described, something called a power law
distribution, with a certain angle to it.
OK, so here's the relationship between how often
do you get little teensy earthquakes and the big ones.
Now instead, what you do is something much more
different from that, which is, you look at 50,000 people,
and you look at their phone calls
over the course of the year.
And you keep track of how far the phone
call was, how distant the person is that they called.
And now you map the distance, the very shortest calls,
the very longest, and the frequency.
And it's the exact same curve.
It's the same power law distribution.
Next version of it.
This was a study that was done, which was-- I don't quite
know how these guys did it.
I always get lost in the math on these.
But in this one, what they did was
they took a whole bunch of marked dollar bills,
and they started in the middle of-- I don't know where,
I think it was at Columbia, something--
and they were somehow able to keep
track of how far the bills had traveled a week later.
And asking, OK, how many bills had
traveled no more than a mile?
How many five miles?
And it was the exact same curve.
And people now have been showing this same power law
distribution.
Here are some of the things that have been shown.
The number of links that websites
have to other websites.
The number that have only one link.
Power law distribution.
Proteins.
The number of proteins showing certain degrees of complexity
and the numbers dropping off with the same power law.
Here's one which is the number of emails somebody
sends over the course of the year.
This is the one that was done at Columbia.
They got access to everybody's email records.
I don't understand how they could have done this.
But it was a couple of million over the course of the year.
And what they showed was the frequency, how many people
were making this small of a number of emails over--
and the same power law.
Then there's this totally crazy one,
which is, OK, do you guys know the Kevin Bacon, six degrees
of separation thing there?
OK.
Someone went and did a study about this
that they got, like, every actor that they
could find who was in a film in the last two years.
And they got all of their filmographies.
And they generated their Kevin Bacon degrees of freedom,
degrees of--
Separation.
Sing it out.
OK.
And they figured it out, the number for each individual.
And then they graphed it.
How many people were six degrees of separation away,
how many were five, so on.
And it's the same pattern.
And this one keeps popping up, this power law business.
And what you see intrinsic in that is, it's a fractal.
Because some of the time you're talking
about what's happening with the tectonic plates on Earth,
and some of the time you're talking about phone calls,
and some of the time you're talking about how molecules
interact with each other.
There's something emergent that goes
on there, which is an outcome of some
of these simple attraction/repulsion rules,
an outcome of simple pioneer generation
and then random movement ones.
And out come structures like these.
This winds up being applicable in a very interesting domain
biologically.
OK, so now we go back to the traveling salesman problem.
And we're having now a cellular version of it
in terms of networks.
You've got a whole bunch of nodes here.
And the choice that each node has to make,
in effect, is how many connections it
will make in the network to other nodes and how far
should those connections be.
Should it only connect with ones way out there?
What does it want to do?
That's nonsense.
In terms of optimizing a system, what
do you want your distribution of connections of nodes
in a network to be?
What is it you want to optimize?
You want to get a system that has
very stable, solid interactions amongst clusters of nodes
but nevertheless occasionally has
the capacity to make long-distance connections
there.
And what you wind up seeing is, if you generate
a power law distribution in terms of, OK, all
of my projections are going to be within this distance
and within this same power law distribution
so that the vast majority of the nodes in the network
are having very local connections.
But still there is a possibility now and then of very long ones.
You get a system that is the most optimal for solving
problems most cheaply, cheaply, and whatever the term is there.
And this solves it for you.
And then you look at brain development.
So you've got neurons forming in the cortex,
in the fetal cortex, and you've got neurons.
You've got all these nodes.
And they have to figure out how to wire up with each other
and how to wire up in a way that is most efficient.
What's most efficient in order to be
able to do the sorts of things the cortex specializes in?
And you now begin to look at the distribution of projections.
And it's a power law relationship.
Most neurons in the cortex are having
the vast majority of their projections very local.
But then you have ones now and then
that have moderate ones, even rarer ones, that
have extremely long ones.
And you look, and this is how the cortex is wired up.
It follows a power law distribution.
And what this allows you to do is
have clusters of stable, functional interactions.
But every now and then, you can talk to somebody way
over at the other end of the cortex to see what's happening.
Interesting finding.
Autism.
Autism, people have been looking for what's up biologically.
And the initial assumptions would
be, there's not going to be enough
neurons in some part of the brain
or maybe too many in another.
What appears to be the case so far
is there's relatively normal number
of neurons in the cortex.
But then some people started studying the projection
profiles of neurons in the cortex of individuals
with autism post-mortem.
Very rare to get these.
And you see a power law distribution.
But it's a different one.
It's a steeper one.
What does that mean?
In the cortex of autistic individuals,
way more of the connections are little local ones.
There's far fewer of the long-distance ones.
There are way more local ones.
What does that produce?
Little pockets, little modules of function
that are isolated from other ones.
And that in some ways is what's going on functionally
in someone with autism.
There is a lack of integration of a whole bunch
of these different functions there.
And that's what happens when you have maybe a mutation or maybe
some epigenetic something or other prenatally that
changes the shape of the power law distribution.
Interesting.
There's a gender difference in the power law distribution
of wiring in the cortex.
Which is, in the typical female brain,
if this is the power law distribution.
And in the male brain it's a little steeper.
Male brains are more modular in their wiring.
What's the biggest part of the brain?
OK, we're running out of space here.
There it is.
There's the brain in cross-section.
And you've got cortex here and cortex there.
And famously, here's all the cell bodies.
And when projections are going from one hemisphere
to the other, it goes across this huge bundle of axons
called the corpus callosum.
The corpus callosum is thicker in women than in men,
on the average.
It is thicker in females than in males
because the power law pattern is such
that there are more long-distance connections
in female networks, and thus it's a thicker corpus callosum.
The same thing is playing out with connections
like this, and connections.
But this is the big honker one.
You get a thinner corpus callosum in men.
You get an even thinner corpus callosum in people with autism.
Again, that hyper male notion there of Baron Cohen's.
What you have here is a perfectly normal number
of neurons, probably even perfectly normal number
of connections between the neurons.
But they're more local, they're more
isolated in the autistic cortex.
There's less integration of function.
It's more isolated islands of function there.
OK.
More examples of where you can get
sort of patterns coming out.
Another version of it, which is bottom-up quality control.
You start a website, you are selling some product,
you are selling books or whatever,
and you're asking people to rate the books.
And you have a board of experts that read all your books,
and they're editors and they're wise and they're learned.
And they write your book reviews and recommend
which ones should be bought and which ones not.
And you get this very successful business
going so that you're selling more and more different
kinds of books.
And as a result, you need to hire
more and more of these experts to read the books
and produce their ratings.
And eventually that just becomes too top heavy.
And what do you do?
The whole world that we completely take for
granted now, you have bottom-up, bottom-up evaluations.
Everybody rates things.
And that's the world where you punch in a book into Amazon
or you look at something in Netflix and when you return it,
it will give you, people who liked this movie tend
to like these things as well.
There are no critics, professional critics,
sitting there doing top-down evaluations.
This is another realm of expressing
attraction and repulsion rules.
I liked this.
I didn't like this.
And all you need to do, then, is throw
in elements of randomization, and you've
got bottom-up quality control.
And that's a completely different way
of doing these things.
What's the greatest example out there of bottom-up systems
with quality control?
Wikipedia.
Wikipedia does not have gray-bearded silverback elders
there writing up the Wikipedia knowledge
and sending it on down to everyone else.
It is a bottom-up self-correcting system.
It is very easy to make fun of some of the stuff
that winds up in Wikipedia, which is, like,
wildly, insanely wrong.
But when you get into areas that are fairly hard nosed.
Very interesting study about five years ago
that Nature commissioned, which was getting a bunch of experts
to look at Wikipedia and to look at the Encyclopedia Britannica
and look at the hard-nosed facts in there
about the physical sciences, the life sciences.
And what you got was, Wikipedia was
in hailing distance of the Encyclopedia Britannica's
level of accuracy.
And that was five years ago.
And it has five years of self-organized correction
since then.
This is amazing.
The Encyclopedia Britannica is like written-- there's,
like, 30, like, elderly, stuffed British scholars that they,
like, have locked in a room for years
who produced the encyclopedia.
And these are the law givers and the knowledge--
And you just let a whole bunch of people
loose with somewhat differing opinions
about whether Madonna was born in 1994 or 1987
or whatever it is.
And you throw them all together and you
do wisdom of the crowd stuff.
And out comes a self-correcting, accurate, adaptive system
with no blueprint, just with some very simple local rules.
Very simple ones, which is looking for similar patterns
shared between different individuals,
and self-correcting.
Where you get even more efficient versions
of that is with a lot of websites,
where not only does everybody get to put in their opinion,
but people whose opinions are better
rated have more of a voice in evaluating somebody else.
You're putting in weighted wisdom
of the crowd-type functions in there,
and out comes incredible accuracy.
These are great.
There is one drawback with those systems, though, which
is, with ones like Netflix, where it tells you
you're going to like this if you like this, that sort of thing.
It's a system that is very biased towards conformity.
It's not good at spotting outliers and sort of taste
and such.
What you really want to do in those systems is,
here are the movies-- of the movies that are out right now,
here are the ones that have 10% of the people think
it's the greatest movie they've ever seen
and 10% think it's the worst movie.
That's an interesting movie to see.
That's when you want to be able to get
a way of bottom-up information about the extremes.
Movies that generate controversy.
Everybody's going to love whatever it is,
and that doesn't take a whole lot.
This is a way to break the potential for conformity
in these bottom-up systems.
Nonetheless, overall it winds up solving a problem
without professional critics, without a blueprint,
without top-down control.
So how do you wire some of these up?
Back to the cortex.
And the adult cortex has these power law distributions,
and they're great because they optimize.
They've got lots of stable, local communication,
but there's still the ability to do
creative long-distance connections.
So that's great.
But how do you get that?
How does the nervous system wire up this way?
And it does swarm intelligence.
The developing cortex does a swarm intelligence solution.
When the cortex is first developing,
what you will have is a first generation, a pioneer
generation, a pioneer generation of cells.
The cortex surface, all of that, that there is a pioneer
generation of cells that basically grow
processes up like these.
And these are called radial glial cells.
What they are, they're the ants with the first generation
of setting down the trail here.
They're the first bees coming in.
And what you then have, the neurons
are the second-generation random wanderers.
And what they do is they come in.
And as they begin to develop, they
have rules that, when they hit a radial glia,
they grow up along it.
They migrate along it, they throw up connections.
And you do that with enough of the cortex, which
is hundreds of millions of billions of neurons in there,
and you get optimal power law distributions.
All you need are some very simple local rules.
And out of that emerges an optimally wired cortex.
And it's the same simple emergent stuff going on.
OK.
So how do we begin to really apply this stuff to humans?
Because it winds up being very pertinent and making
sense of some of the most interesting complex things
about us.
So what's the difference between humans and every other species?
Nothing all that exciting.
From a neurobiological standpoint,
you've got this real challenge, which is, you look at a neuron
from a fruit fly under a microscope
and you look at one from us and it's
going to look kind of the same.
Looking at a single neuron, you can't tell
which species it came from.
We have the same kind of neurotransmitters
that a worm uses in its nervous system.
We've got the same kind of ion channels,
the same sort of excitability, the same action potentials.
You know, minor details are different.
We have not become humans by inventing
new types of brain cells and new types of chemical messengers.
We have the same basic off-the-rack neuron
that a fly does.
Oh.
We have very similar basic building blocks.
What's the difference, of course,
is we've got 100 million of them for every neuron
that you find in a fly brain.
And out of that comes emergent properties.
Great story.
Garry KAS-pah-rof, kas-PAH-rof, I never
remember which syllable to emphasize.
Grandmaster Russian, chess grandmaster in the '90s.
And apparently he's rated as one of the strongest of all times.
And he was the person who wound up
participating in this really major event, which
was this tournament with this chess-playing computer
that IBM had built called Deep Blue or Big Blue or Old Yeller.
What was it called?
Deep Blue, Deep Blue, Deep Blue.
And they played against each other.
And apparently what happened was, in the first game,
Kasparov won perhaps.
And the computer was able to modify its strategy
and then proceeded to mop the floor with him.
And this was a landmark event in computer science.
This was the first time that a computer
had beaten a chess grandmaster.
Amazing event.
Not surprisingly, afterward Kasparov
is all bummed out and depressed.
And his friends were trying to make him feel better.
And they go to him and they say, look, all you got done in by
is quantity.
All you got done in by is the fact
that that computer could do a whole lot more
computations than you could in a set amount of time.
I'm told, apparently chess grandmaster types
can see five, six moves ahead.
And they can intuit where the interesting ones were.
And Deep Blue could calculate every single possible outcome,
like, seven, eight moves in advance.
And every time, it would simply pick the one
that was the best outcome.
It was like generating solutions to the traveling salesman
problem.
Kasparov didn't have a chance because the computer
could simply generate enough solutions
to pick the right one.
So all of them are saying to him,
you should not be depressed because all that computer had
going for it was quantity.
And what he said in response was,
yeah, but with enough quantity you invent quality.
And that's the exact equivalent of one ant
makes no sense and 10,000 do.
That's the exact equivalent, with enough of these elements
here, you optimize.
We do not have fancy neurons that
are different than in any other species.
We've just got more of them.
And simple nearest neighbor rules, and you throw a million
of them together and you get a fruit fly.
And you throw 100 billion of them together
and you get poetry and you get symphonies and you get theology
and you get all of that.
And it's the same building blocks.
With enough quantity, you invent quality.
And this is the punch line that came out
of really important work a few years ago.
OK, we're now, what, 10 years, I think, into having
the human genome sequenced.
And about five years ago they sequenced the chimp genome.
Soundbite.
Everybody learned from whenever back
when is that the human and chimp share 98% of its DNA.
So finally you had these two gigantic rolls of print-out.
And here is the entire human genome
and here's the entire chimp one.
And somebody could finally sit there
and compare them and compare them and see, indeed,
is it 98% shared?
And that winds up being the answer,
even though what that number actually means is debatable.
But that brings up the question, of course, what's the 2%?
What's the 2% that differs?
And what has come out of that have been some very interesting
findings.
Some that were mentioned earlier on,
which is, they are disproportionately
coding for transcription factors and splicing enzymes
and, OK, that amplification of network stuff.
It is preferentially coding for non-coding regions, differing
but non-- all the stuff from back,
that lecture for getting macroevolutionary changes.
That's how you get a different species coming out.
But how about other types of genes?
What were some of the key differences?
Here was one big difference.
We have about 1,000 fewer genes for our olfactory receptors
than chimps do.
They've been inactivated in us.
They're called pseudogenes in us.
They don't express.
And that's about half of the difference in the genome
between humans and chimps.
If you want to turn a chimp into a human,
you're halfway there if you just give it a lousy sense of smell.
That's half the genetic differences?
What other differences are there?
There were ones having to do with morphology, bone
development, probably bipedalism versus being
a partial quadruped.
There are ones having to do with hair development, which
is why chimps have all the hair on them and only those,
like, disturbing people with the hair on their shoulders
have that much hair.
So that's-- there's differences in some reproductive-related
genes.
You don't want to mate with them, all of that.
And then you say, where's the genes
having to do with the brain?
Are there any differences there?
And there turned out to be very, very few.
And they turned out to be very, very logical.
The handful that differ seem to have something
to do with cell division.
Have something to do with how many rounds of cell division
these cells go through.
And what you have is, the human versions
go through more rounds.
And calculations have been done looking
at the average number of neurons that each progenitor
cell generates, say, during cortical development.
And if you start with the number of neurons
that you find in a rhesus monkey brain
and have it do three or four more rounds of cell division,
you get a human brain in terms of the numbers.
Qualitatively, it's the exact same neurons.
All that differs is quantity.
And you put enough of these together
and you go from tools, which are meant
to get little termites out, into human technology,
the difference between us and them is one of quantity.
Throw enough neurons in there, and out begins
emerging all these distinctive human things.
So what does that do?
That begins to, for one thing, underline
what the main genetics are about in terms
of the genetic differences in the brain between us
and, say, chimps are genes that free you
from genetic influences.
Because those are not specifying what sort of cells
you generate in larger numbers in the brain.
They're not specifying connections.
They're just specifying larger quantity.
And all this stuff goes to work and out comes a human brain
instead of a chimp one.
OK, so what does this whole subject get us?
The chaos stuff, the complexity emergent stuff.
What are some of the themes that come through with all of it?
The first one is this emphasis on quantity.
You want to get a very, very fancy system.
You don't necessarily have to invent a new type of ant
or a new type of 0 or 1 in a binary system
or a new type of neuron.
You could do it with quantity.
You get quality, you get excellence, you get complexity,
you get adaptive optimization with huge numbers of elements
with the very simple rules.
What's the next theme that comes out of it?
One that is totally counterintuitive.
Once again, like this whole subject
that shoots reductionism down the drain,
totally counterintuitive.
The simpler the constituent parts, the better.
Fancy, complicated ants that are specialized and have
all sorts of different rules.
They are not going to generate swarm intelligence
as effectively as do systems with the simpler elements.
The more simple the building blocks are, the better.
Something else that is intrinsic to all
of this, which runs counter to all sorts
of rational intuitions, which is more random interactions
make for better, more adaptive networks.
You want lots of random noise thrown
in there because that's how you stumble onto optimal solutions.
Randomness is a good thing.
And remember, right at the time that we're making new neurons
in the cortex, that's when you induce the transposable events
in the genome.
That's where you juggle the DNA producing randomness there.
Randomness is a good thing.
Randomness adds to the excellence of networks
What else?
Next thing as a theme that comes out of it
is the power of gradients of information.
Things that guide you, you a cell, you an ant,
you a commercial district.
Things that can guide you towards things,
things that can repel you, gradients
of attraction and repulsion.
And that's exactly what's going on.
There is a gradient in magnets when
they're this close and the power that they have is dropping off.
As they move, gradients provide a lot
of the optimization in these systems.
Very, very important as well is nearest neighbor interactions.
These are not just a handful of simple rules
about how you're interacting with somebody in Chicago.
These are all how you interact with another ant,
another bee when you bump into it, a glial cell.
Local interactions with simple rules.
Something else.
Another one that runs totally counter
to intuition, which is generalists
work better in these systems than specialists do.
Generalists are more likely to come up
with these adaptive outcomes.
OK, so what does all of this mean on a larger level?
And what I think is that this is where
the complexity of human brains and human behaviors come from,
these emergent properties.
And this is now a generation or two into people
thinking about this stuff.
And it is incredibly hard to think about.
And most of the work I do and my peers do
is reductive stuff that is very limited.
And like, I don't understand how to think
about it in this other way.
And the odds are, you guys are not
going to be good enough at it either.
You're good enough that you were a first generation growing up
that knows, if you want to find out
if you're going to like a movie or not,
you don't need to have somebody with expertise
and a label on their forehead and a blueprint and top down.
You don't need critics anymore.
You have bottom-up systems.
You guys who are first generation growing up
thinking in that way.
What's a consequence of that?
You are beginning to get better at this stuff.
And my guess is, it's not until, like, your grandkids
that you're going to have people thinking
so much in the emergent systems that we're finally
going to be able to figure out what the brain is doing.
And where you see there is all sorts
of things that can happen.
If there was more bottom-up communication
in the trenches in World War I, they
would have stopped the war.
All these emergent things bottom up.
We've now had revolutions when Marcos
was overthrown in the Philippines
back when that was basically bloodless.
When the Czech revolution occurred,
it was called the Velvet Revolution
because there was no violence.
All they had to do was get enough people in the town
square in the capital and paralyze the country,
and they took it over.
I will predict that within our lifetime
there is going to be a revolution
in some country at some point where nobody
leaves their living rooms.
All they do is do something online
with some emergent bottom-up thing
and they collapse the government and do it in and no one
will have to leave their living room because it will be
all emergent things coming up.
The final couple of points here.
First one is, all that chaotic, strange, attractor stuff, all
of us spend a lot of time thinking
about how we're not quite up to the ideal this or not.
We're not at the ideal appearance.
We're not at the ideal intelligence.
We're not at the ideal choice of perfume.
We're not at the ideal anything.
What strange attractors and chaos shows
you is the notion that there is an ideal,
that there is an essentialist optimal, whatever, is a myth.
We are all deviating from the optima
because the optima is just an emergent, imaginary thing.
The other final point is, something that you guys are
going to be much better at than any previous generation,
which, if you grow up thinking, when
I want to find out if a movie is good or not,
I do bottom-up stuff, you are growing up with a mindset
that you don't need blueprints.
You don't need top-down blueprints.
And implicit in that, when you look
at how you can get complex, adaptive, optimized systems
without blueprints is the fact that, if you
don't need blueprints, you don't need somebody
who makes the blueprints.
And it will be a lot easier to comprehend that
as being the case.
You don't have to have a source of top-down instruction
if you don't need a blueprint.
OK, so I don't know.
 Let's get started.
We switch to our next subject, where the overall plan
could be summarized like that, as you well
know by now-- looking at the language,
looking at the biological roots of the interactions
with the environment, all the deal
that we have under our belts by now.
Same strategy as usual, starting off with the behavior,
and then working our way back.
First off, two announcements before I forget.
One is we're not going to have a lecture on depression.
The remaining lectures will be Wednesday schizophrenia,
Friday is biology of religion, and the following Wednesday
is the final lecture personality disorders
individual differences.
And apropos of that, not positive at the moment,
but I'm leaning towards the last two lectures
not being taped for a number of reasons.
OK, also one final point from Wednesday,
from Friday's lecture, the complexity one,
back to that business, swarm intelligence, and being
able to solve the traveling salesman problem for you
with remarkable efficiency, that business again
about how the cortex wires up that two generation
business of cells, the first cells being
those radial glia that established
sort of a super structure, the second generation
then being the neurons that do the random laundering, hit
and grow up there, and then wire up in these optimal nodes.
What you also get is a version intrinsic in that it is solving
the traveling salesman problem.
If you think about it, if you've got
20, 30 billion cortical neurons there, and all of them
are wiring up to 10,000 other neurons,
depending on how efficiently you pack it,
you could have a hundred gazillion miles of axons
that you have to grow, or just a couple of kilometers worth.
And, again, the pressure is to come up with the traveling
salesman efficiency to be able to pull off the wiring
that you want with the minimal amount of expenditure of axons.
And what you see when you look at the way
the cortex does wire up people working
on this showing remarkably efficient solutions coming out
of that brain's equivalent of doing swarm intelligence.
So language, starting off with our usual strategy-- starting
off with what the behaviors look like.
And the place to begin is with some
of the universals of language.
Across all the different human languages, approximately 6,000
of them, and all sorts of depressing news
about that to come.
First off, something that they all have in common
is semanticity-- the notion that there
is an endless array, an infinite array,
of sounds that could be generated by voices.
And what all languages do is bucket them, as per usual,
break up this continuum of sounds into units of meaning,
and where meaning corresponds to the unit itself.
The notion of that being a pair of people
we'll more about later-- Marc Hauser, Noam Chomsky,
pointing out that even though you could generate
an infinite number of words, you could never generate 6.5 words.
That's part of what semanticity is about.
Not only do you break continuum of sounds
into buckets of meaning.
But they are discrete buckets.
You cannot have partial words.
Also, what else is universal to languages?
The possibility of embedded clauses.
And ones that get considerably more complicated,
all languages not only have a can do b.
But they all have a under this condition,
but not under that condition, and sometimes on Tuesdays
but never on Thursdays can do b.
All of them will have embedded clauses
like that, that being a universal.
What else?
All of them show recursion, which
is a really important property.
Old term for it would be something like generativity,
which is all languages have a finite number of words.
And all languages have the potential
to generate an infinite number of combinations.
And all you have to do see that is come up
with what you believe is the longest sentence
in all of history.
And all you have to do is put at the beginning of it Bill said
that, blah, blah.
And once that's there, then you have
to have Jane said that Bill said that.
And, thus, you have an infinite generativity.
All languages, finite number of words,
infinite number of combinations.
What else?
Very important feature of human language
when we get to comparing it with animal communication--
displacement.
We can talk about stuff from the past.
We can talk about stuff from the future.
We can talk about stuff on the other side of the planet.
We can talk about things that are
emotionally distant from us.
And as we'll see with animals, the overwhelming majority
of animal communication is about emotion.
I am upset.
I am angry.
I am afraid.
I am horny.
I am hungry.
I am whatever it is.
Humans, instead, can talk about chess strategies--
displacement, displacement from emotion.
Related to that, there's arbitrariness of language.
What do I mean by this?
In virtually any animal species that
is communicating, for example, I am terrified out of my mind,
it's going to involve something resembling that species'
equivalent of screaming and emoting loudly, and saying,
ah, or some equivalent of that.
We are able to say, I am feeling a deeply corrosive sense
of disquietude at the moment.
We don't have the actual words being tied inextricably
into their meaning.
You cannot look at a word and say,
whoa that word has an awful lot of right angles in the letters
there.
It must be a word that tells you something
about this type of philosophy.
It's arbitrary relationship between the signal
and the message.
And that is universal to human languages.
What else is universal?
The ability to have this lecture, meta communication,
to communicate about communication,
to be able to step back from language
and discuss it in and of itself.
And one extreme version of it is to have
people who devote their times to inventing language.
Two examples-- one is the French have some national institution
which is meant to save the French language
from the sullying effects of words
from all sorts of other languages.
And they make all sorts of rulings
as to what words are now allowed to become French.
And I don't know what they decided about le Big Mac,
whether that came in.
But this is a body that studies and decides what words
should be part of its language.
Similarly, there is a college in Washington DC
called Gallaudet College, which is for deaf individuals.
And it's ground zero for American Sign Language.
It's the place where some band of sign language elder poobahs
sit around and decide on new words in that language.
As we'll see, that's not a very effective strategy.
But nonetheless, that is meta communication.
Every single language has the ability to talk about language.
Every single language and its practitioners
use motherese, use baby talk.
Baby talk where typically the mother, but not exclusively so,
will speak to a child in a high-pitched voice
emphasizing melodic and vowel aspects of it,
repeating phrases, focusing very closely in on the baby's face.
All of these languages have motherese.
And the question becomes, is motherese about emotion,
or is it about instruction?
And what you see is some real similarities between motherese
and how people often talk to their pets.
And you're usually not trying to teach your pets how
to speak your native language.
One difference, though, with speaking
to pets you get the repetitive, high-pitched voice stuff.
You don't get the close clarity.
You do not make a point of making the sound slowly
and clearly.
You are not teaching your dog language there.
So that is a difference.
Nonetheless, in every single language, you get motherese.
Next, you have what's going to be
an issue throughout when trying to make
sense of the biology of this.
When we're looking at what's going
on in the brain in that sort of thing,
is language in those cases what you're
doing with your lips, your larynx, your throat?
Is the language mostly about the motoric aspects?
This is a system involving the generation of sound
and the reception of sound.
Or is it more about cognition?
Is it more about the conceptual structure?
And the general view in the field
is it's overwhelmingly about the latter.
And some of the strongest evidence for that
comes from sign languages-- American Sign Language.
American Sign Language, which shows all sorts of very subtle,
deep properties that are similar to spoken language
amid it not being a spoken language,
and amid using completely different systems in the brain.
One example of this-- you look at babies who are born
deaf and will be learning American Sign Language.
And right around the age that hearing infants begin
to babble with their spoken language,
deaf babies begin to babble in American Sign Language,
and are starting to make signs with that.
Just like hearing babies, they tend to babble that most people
before going to sleep.
It's the same property.
There is not a rule that says, somewhere
around nine months of age, begin making
sounds that are fragments of stuff you've been hearing.
Somewhere around nine months of age,
begin to practice fragments of whatever communicative system
you are being exposed to.
Similar evidence that language is
about the cognitive structure and not
about lips and tongue-- when older individuals who
are native speakers of American Sign Language
happen to have a stroke, they can get the exact same sort
of communication disorders in sign language
that speaking individuals do.
And we'll see that in more detail, what some
of these pathologies look like.
It's coded for in very similar parts of the brain.
Both spoken language and sign language
have something called prosody, which we will hear more about.
Prosody is not the words in a language.
Prosody is the tone, what you're doing with your face, what
you're doing with your hands, the gestures, your body
posture, all the things that are communicated
through those routes there, all the things
which virtually by definition-- email,
you can't do prosody with, beyond little smiley face
things.
That's about the limits of prosody.
You find prosody in American Sign Language,
people doing very different facial expressions.
One classic example of sign language
prosody is if somebody in American Sign Language
is describing a conversation between two people they will
subtly shift their body as they're going from one person
to the other there.
This is prosody.
This is reinforcing the information.
This is a dialogue that this is exactly what spoken language
people do in terms of that prosody,
the same thing in American Sign Language.
Next, amazing bit of evidence from ASL-- American Sign
Language-- that this is about cognition, not about lips
and tongue of what makes it a language, which is you
look at someone who is born deaf,
and where ASL is their native language.
And when you are signing to them,
their auditory cortex activates, the same regions
that do some of the initial processing of hearing language.
Again, it's about the deep concepts within.
It
More evidence-- you get accents in American Sign Language.
And, apparently, this consists of different speeds,
slurring, that sort of thing.
And there's regional accents in ASL.
And I have no idea if it matches in some ways
the accents of the spoken English there.
My guess is no, but you have accents there.
You have poetry in American Sign Language, where
you will have a sign that is some movement followed
by this movement.
And I'm obviously just making this up.
And then you can have this movement
followed by the same movement.
That counts as rhyming words.
You get poetry in American Sign Language.
And you get storage of American Sign Language when
it is a second language in the same sorts of regions
of the cortex as when people get a second spoken language.
This is not merely about languages what
you do with sounds and hearing.
Language is, instead, about the underlying cognitive
structures.
OK, cool thing, if you ever start learning American Sign
Language, almost certainly somewhere on the first day
they're going to show you what a cool language it is by teaching
you the following word.
This is always the first word you
need to learn in American Sign Language.
OK just to show you building blocks of it,
this is the word for milk.
OK, you can kind of see some iconic stuff going on there, as
to this means milk.
So what does this word mean in American Sign Language?
Pasteurized milk.
Who said that?
How do you know?
Do you know it already?
It's his favorite joke.
Oh my God.
How's that-- identical twins separated at birth.
Do you flush the toilet before you go?
OK, yes, giving it away, past your eyes milk, oh, oh.
Can you believe that?
You better guess the folks at that Gallaudet College
went out and celebrated the rest of the day when
somebody came up with that one.
Yes, you can have puns in American Sign Language.
Yeah, it's you and me there with the pasteurized milk sign.
Yes, the very first thing you learn in most cases.
This is a real language.
You have emotion.
You have physical prosody.
You have accents.
You have puns.
You have a poetry.
And it's got nothing to do with lips and tongue.
And as we'll see more and more here
about the neurobiology of it, it will be more and more evidence
for that.
Thus, we now shift over to the neurobiology.
What's going on in the brain, in terms of language production,
language comprehension?
Right off the bat, there is this sort of irritating debate
that goes on in the field, which is how modular of a function
is language in the brain?
Which is another way of saying neurobiologically,
how fancy and separate is language
from the rest of the cognitive stuff that the cortex does?
And what we certainly just argued
with ASL is insofar as language might be a relatively
isolated module, it's sure not a module
that's very concerned about tongues and ears.
It's about the cognitive elements.
How different are the cortical devices
devoted to making sense of language,
different from the other cortical regions?
And at one extreme, there's a view
that talks about the cortex, the brain, as a Swiss army knife,
that it has all these separate little functions, language
being one of the most isolated, identifiable ones.
My sense-- and I know next to nothing
about it-- is that this argument doesn't stand up.
Here's the two things that people always
cite when discussing how much is language
a cortically modular function.
First one is the disease we heard about the other week,
that Williams Syndrome.
And that's that strange genetic disorder of you
have these kids who are wildly verbal, and expressive,
and warm, and affectionate, and have that weird vasopressin
oxytocin world going on with them.
They're extremely adept with language.
Yet, they typically have IQs in the borderline retarded range,
around 70 or so.
Whoa, how can you have functional language
amid everything else being a mess?
This is an argument for language as a distinct module.
Conversely, you have things called specific language
impairments, which are also heritable disorders where
you have individuals, where you have pedigrees, where people
have a huge amount of time producing
language, comprehending language.
And this is not sensory problems.
This is people having perfectly normal IQs--
oo, separate module.
The arguments that both Williams and the selective language
impairment disorders argue for a module
breaks down with the fact that when
you look at language and the Williams kids,
they're very fluent, and very generative of words.
But there's not a huge amount of meaning in there.
And, likewise, the people with the specific language
impairments, it's turning out it's
usually not in the normal IQ range in these individuals.
So I think, generally, there's this pretty strong argument
against language being a strict module.
Nonetheless, people who actually think about this for a living
as opposed to spout off, this is a very, very controversial
issue.
More, the next most characteristic thing
about the neurobiology of language is it's lateralized.
Lateralization of brain function-- the notion
that somewhere in your cortex, your cortex
could be doing something or other,
and it turns out that it will only do that something or other
on one side of your brain.
There will be specializations on different sides of the brain.
That goes back to last Friday.
That's one of the ways you gotta solve the traveling salesman
problem.
If you have these massive numbers of neurons
in the cortex, you gotta start inventing lateralization
to save yourself some axons.
And it's not until you get to monkeys and apes
that you see substantial amounts of lateralization.
Human brain lateralization for language
is probably the most distinctive lateralization
we've got other than handedness.
And for that, we begin to look at the relevant brain
regions going on here.
How, first, do you see that brain regions, that language
production, language comprehension,
is carried out by only one side of the brain?
Our usual, ever-reliable research technique,
which is getting people whose heads are damaged in accidents
or warfare and seeing, you get damage on one side of the head
and people are far more likely to get language problems
afterward than the other.
What turns out to be the case is about 90% of people
have language lateralization to the left side of their brain.
As we'll see, not so fast, it's not that clean.
But nonetheless, you begin to see that.
Another test, another way of seeing
that which is considerably more subtle than somebody
getting their head bashed in, is something called the WADA test.
The WADA test where, weirdly enough,
you anesthetize one half of somebody's brain.
You infuse anesthetic into one of the carotids.
And you put one hemisphere to sleep.
And what you see is you do it on the left side.
And most people, they lose their language production.
And you do it on the other side, and other stuff disappears.
Whoa, that must be a fun thing to do at parties.
When does this happen?
First off, it is very brief.
It lasts for only a few minutes or so until the anesthetic
clears.
But what you do that for is in circumstances where somebody
has intractable epilepsy.
And they're good to go in and cut out
part of the cortex in cases where
it is cortically localized.
And if it's near what might be the language center
of the brain, they go in.
And they do a WADA test first to see,
is this person doing language on left side or right side?
If it's the side where we're doing the surgery,
we've got to be that much more conservative
in terms of getting this out, getting the tumor out,
whatever.
It gives you a sense of whether that's
going for the language center.
And what you do is the person is sitting there.
And they're supposed to be reading.
Or you're reciting something to them.
And they're supposed to be writing it down,
or some such a language-y thing.
And you infuse a barbiturate into one carotid.
And, suddenly, 10 seconds later, they can't speak.
Or they're not understanding language.
And you've now identified that that's
the side with the language lateralization.
I'm not sure.
But my guess would be that the WADA test
is going to disappear soon because you could do it just
with brain imaging.
You look at someone.
You give them some sort of linguistic something or other.
And if one side of the cortex activates preferentially
in the areas we're about to hear about,
you've just identified the side.
So the relevant areas-- very broadly,
there are three regions in the brain, the cortex, that
are most pertinent to language.
First one is called Broca's area.
Broca's area, which is sitting on the cortex in a region
called the parietal lobe.
And simply what it is is it's the bottommost part
of the strip of the cortex that does motoric stuff, moving
your body.
And by the time you're getting down here,
what this is about is moving your lips,
moving your larynx, language production.
We've already seen it's not just going to be about that.
If people with American Sign Language get a stroke here,
and they get problems producing this.
But, nonetheless, on the first crude pass,
it's the part of the cortex devoted to motoric regulation
of lips, tongues, throat, larynx, et cetera.
So what happens when you get damage there?
General term, an aphasia.
Aphasia is the broad neurological term
for being unable to communicate effectively
because of a neurological hit.
You get a Broca's aphasia, a production aphasia.
This is someone who now has a great deal of trouble
generating meaningful words, meaningful messages.
It comes out haltingly.
The actual content can be quite impaired.
Amid them, being relatively good at comprehending.
Then just south of there, you've got
this area called Wernicke's area, again named
for famous poo-ba in that area.
And this is right near some primary auditory cortex.
What's Wernicke's about?
Of course, obviously it's about language comprehension.
And you get someone with stroke damage to there,
you get a Wernicke's aphasia.
And you get someone who just is fluidly generating of language
they can't comprehend.
They can't comprehend directions.
Put your right hand on your left,
whatever, that sort of thing.
But what you also see is they're very fluidly
generating language that often makes no sense whatsoever
because they are not comprehending
anything spoken around them.
They produce what is often called a vegetable
salad, a language salad.
Somebody knows?
Word salad, yes.
OK, you guys come down teach this.
I'm going to go back there and check my emails.
OK, so word salad-- so you got Wernicke's, you got Broca's.
You got Wernicke's aphasias, Broca's aphasias.
And then you've got this area, the arcuate fasciculus,
which was not named for somebody named arcuate fasciculus.
But it's the bundle, it's the set, of projections, the axons,
connecting Wernicke's with Broca's.
So what's that about?
It's about connecting comprehension
to language production.
In theory, if you had an absolutely pure wiping out
of the arcuate fasciculus, and both these guys were completely
intact, you would get somebody who could completely
understand language.
You could give them complex instructions, what to do.
They would be able to follow it.
This would be somebody who could produce language perfectly, say
anything they want to.
This would be someone who is incapable of going
from Wernicke's comprehension to production.
You could not successfully say to the person,
say the word cat.
They could not connect this auditory command to production
there.
So that would be a pure arcuate fasciculus damage.
Not surprisingly, you hardly ever see anybody
with stroke damage causing an aphasia where it's cleanly
only in one of these areas.
Almost everyone who gets an aphasia
has some sort of a mixed Broca's, Wernicke's connection
conduction aphasia there.
It's always a mess.
And in the past, but I don't think we have time for it this
year, I would bring in a tape to listen to a number of different
types of individuals with aphasias post-stroke,
hearing a relatively pure Broca's, a relatively pure
Wernicke's.
But those are quite rare.
OK, so those are some of the relevant brain regions.
Production, what you've got there is motoric stuff.
OK, so back to-- we've just defined
that this is the part of the brain
having to do with your lips and tongues, and this deal again.
This is about hearing.
So what about people who are deaf,
born deaf, with American Sign Language?
These are the areas that light up
when they are hearing, when they are
seeing, when they are being spoken to in American Sign
Language.
This is the area, Broca's, that activates
when they are communicating.
What you've done here is hijacked-- you know,
this is traditionally about tongues, and lips,
and all of that.
But we can hijack it for a very symbolic way of doing
the same sort of cognitions.
Yeah, this part of the brain is for somebody
sticking a pin in your finger.
But it's been hijacked to feeling the world's pain.
It's making use of new ways that we're doing stuff here, just
jamming it into old sites.
You're going to try to communicate using your hands.
And, suddenly, you're going to have
to make use of some of these spoken regions
there if you don't speak a language, so that.
More examples of how ASL is about the content rather than
the motoric aspects-- take someone who is speaking.
And they're having to recite a bunch of words quickly.
And you're checking them for accuracy.
And you give them a distractor that they
have to do at the same time.
They have to tap their feet, their left foot, three times,
and once on the right, three times, once--
and your performance gets screwed up at that point.
It's not as accurate, because you're also paying attention
to this.
Now do the same thing with someone with American Sign
Language.
Give them the same foot distractor.
If American Sign Language is heavily
about it's just stuff you're doing with your hands,
it's just another way of communicating spoken language,
all it's really about is tongues, and lips, and throat.
American Sign Language, what it's about is motoric stuff.
If it's motoric, it should be screwed up by this task
to a greater extent than people that are messed up when they're
using a spoken language.
It's messed up to the exact same extent.
The pertinent thing about this is not
what you're doing with your muscles.
It's the same cognitive structures
that you're tapping into with the spoken language.
Finally, in that realm, there is some weirdo whistling language
that's used on some island in the Canary Islands
that people have been whistling at each other
and at their sheep for centuries and centuries.
And, apparently, it actually fits
some of the profiles of what a true language is.
There's a very complex structure to it.
And what you've seen in one study
so far is when people are producing it,
they're lighting up here.
When they were hearing it, they're lighting up Wernicke's.
Again, basic off the rack hominid for a long,
long time, this is about ears, this is about tongues.
And, instead, it's about the abstract, the symbolic,
elements of language.
Demonstrating that further, depending
on where you get the stroke damage,
there's this whole world of bizarre aphasias,
or disorders of communication.
You get alexias.
You get agraphias-- people who can speak, can comprehend,
can read.
They simply cannot write anymore.
People who can do all those things,
they simply can't read anymore.
People who lose the capacity to recognize certain letters,
certain types of words, gerunds.
There's some gerund aphasia out there,
whatever a gerund is, which I once knew.
You get all these sorts of specializations
by having far smaller strokes, all these subroutines.
Apparently, there has been at least one case
of an elderly sailor who had a stroke, who
had learned semaphores, which I guess
was some big thing in World War II or something,
and had a semaphore aphasia.
This is not a very common hominid event to have happened.
This is all the different ways.
This is lips, ears.
It's reading.
it's writing.
It's semaphores.
It's pantomime.
It's who knows what.
It's much, much more abstract than that.
OK, so you've got the left cortex,
with its specialization.
In 90% of cases, you get slightly different localization
of Wernicke's and Broca's, in particular the areas related
to reading when you have a language which
instead of an alphabet is a pictograph language.
For example, Chinese, a pictograph language,
you get slightly different areas of activation, and thus
slightly different areas of strokes
will produce a Chinese Broca's aphasia, or an alexia,
that sort of thing.
Doing language as pictures, as opposed to doing language
of building blocks of individual letters,
slightly localized differently in the brain.
So the brain is completely devoting its energy
on the left side to language in 90% of people.
Lateralized, you don't have a Broca's or a Wernicke's
on the right side.
Destroy the equivalent areas, you do nothing to language.
Cut through the brain in cross section, and on this side
the cortex will be a little bit thicker
than the cortex on the right side, the equivalent area.
So language is all about the left hemisphere.
So, of course, this is not true, because you
get the prosody stuff in the right hemisphere.
That's where you get the coding for tone of voice.
That's the part of the brain that's
telling you if the person is having
a sarcastic tone in their voice when they're saying that.
That's the area that's picking up on facial expressions, body
language.
All of that is right hemisphere in 90% of people.
And what you see is stroke damage,
you can get prosody disorders as well.
People are perfectly normal in their auditory comprehension,
their reading, writing, their production,
all that sort of stuff.
But they can't understand context of spoken language
from body posture, from tone of voice, things of that sort.
So you can have prosody damage, right cortex.
Next, more pertinent areas in the brain--
a subcortical region called the basal ganglia.
What's the basal ganglia about?
It tells a lot of your muscles what to do.
And, for example, when your frontal cortex
has finished wrestling with all the limbic regions,
a lot of what the outcome is, is activation of the basal ganglia
making you do something.
Oh, go do the harder but right thing, that sort of thing.
Basal ganglia is about motor stuff.
OK, duh, this is not surprising.
This is not terribly interesting.
Obviously, language involves motoric stuff,
whether it's spoken, whether it's signed, whatever.
So, obviously, the parts of the brain
that generate relevant muscle movement,
they're going to get activated, also they're involved.
Just a couple of things that makes this basal ganglia more
interesting, though, which is the next time you're
talking on the phone or watching somebody talk on the phone,
see the frequency with which they're making hand gestures.
You're hand gesturing under those circumstances.
You're hand gesturing to your GPS system
when it's talking to you.
You're hand gesturing in all sorts of circumstances
where there is no visual communication going on.
Blind individuals, when they are speaking to each other use
the same sorts of hand gestures as seeing individuals do.
It's not just, OK, we've got to get the basal ganglia in here
because we've got to do something or other
with our jaw and our lips.
Something about the emotiveness is centrally
tied into the motoric output.
Because it's impossible to talk on the phone
and not to be gesturing with your hands.
If you're talking about anything that's
at all sort of activated, or aroused, or emotional,
your hands are going like crazy.
And it makes no sense.
The basal ganglia is really central to all of this.
Next, finally, in terms of a brain structure,
the rest of the limbic system.
Totally clear what that one's going
to be about, which is the limbic system has
nothing to do with language.
The limbic system has to do with screaming your head off
if you're terrified.
The limbic system has to do with singing.
The limbic system, it's emotional.
It's got nothing to do with, OK, let's
embed a clause here now in order to express some emotion.
And what you see is, initially, a nice clean dichotomy
with that.
And a remarkable thing you will see.
So somebody has had a stroke.
And they've got a Broca's aphasia,
which is to say they're having a production aphasia.
It is really next to impossible for them to speak.
It is halting.
It is broken.
They can't get the words.
It is insanely frustrating.
And one of the things that speech therapists do
is get people to sing what it is they're trying to say,
because if you make sort of a running leap
there and start singing it before you think about, oh,
here I am singing the menu at the restaurant
for the customers here, before you start doing that,
if you can jump quickly into it, people with Broca's production
aphasias can sing, often, what they want to communicate
because they are sending it down south subcortically,
and looping it through limbic language areas,
sort of marinating it in some emotional content--
music in this case-- and out it comes.
Not surprisingly, accuracy is not
so hot under those circumstances.
But it's a lot better than when you've got the Broca's aphasia
not being able to speak at all.
So that's pretty interesting.
Next thing that suggests that the limbic system has something
central to do with language, you look
at people with Tourette's disease, which
we're going to hear a lot about on Wednesday.
And Tourette's disease, everybody
knows what Tourette's disease is about.
It's the disease where you curse uncontrollably.
As we'll see, there's much more going on than that.
But cursing, it's all about limbic stuff.
Tourette's is involving not problems
with Broca's cortical regions generating cursing.
It's about limbic hyperactivity, and all sorts of other realms.
So limbic system having all sorts
of access to your language production.
Another realm in which there is clearly,
the second you think about it, an intersection
between your cold, machine-like, analytical cortical regions
doing symbolic language production comprehension
for you, and your emotional limbic world,
this remarkable phenomenon of you
can feel better when you are upset
about something as a result of talking to someone.
Psychotherapy is completely built
around the notion that there are very deep,
fundamental connections between one's language world
and one's limbic one.
So, again, this is doing in the notion
not only that all language is about is
motoric aspects of generating language, and auditory.
It's about the deep, cognitive structures.
It's also not some cold, cognitive task there.
It is highly intertwined with limbic structures.
As you would thus expect, studies
showing that if you, for example, stimulate
some subcortical regions in individuals
as part of, again, neurosurgery, trying
to figure out where a tumor is, stimulate
some of those regions.
And people will say emotionally loaded things.
They will say something very emotionally expressive,
positive, negative, whatever.
Stimulate some of the same regions,
say, in a rhesus monkey, and it will give a threat call.
It will give an alarm call.
It will give a solicitive call.
It will express something emotive.
So the limbic system has all sorts
of ways in which it's talking to these cortical regions.
And, not surprisingly, it's got lots
of ways of talking to the porosity areas
in the right hemisphere, since that's
where a lot of the emotional expressivity
is coming through-- not in the words,
but in the tone of voice, the facial expressions,
all of that.
So neurobiology, now looking at it in a taxonomic context--
other species.
Everyone would have guessed up until people
actually went and looked that we're
the only folks with a Broca, with a Wernicke's area,
that this is a human specialization.
And what you see is that's pretty much the case.
But you see the starts of it in a number of primate species,
a number of apes, and chimps, and orangutans
In rhesus monkeys, what you see is the cortical thickening
just on one side corresponding to this area,
not as thickened as in the human brain in the left hemisphere.
But nonetheless, you get thickening like that.
Moreover, how's this for interesting-- OK,
does everybody know the factoid that it's
the left side of your brain that's
telling the right side of your body to do something,
and it's the right side of your brain
that's crosswiring, whatever it is it does?
OK, get a monkey who is vocalizing.
And while it is vocalizing something communicative,
while it is doing that, if it is doing
any sort of facial expressions, it's
more pronounced on the right side of the face.
If it's doing something with its arms,
it's more likely to be the right arm.
In other words, generating the vocalization
is preferentially coming from the left hemisphere,
and pulling in more motoric stuff
on the side of the brain that operates this part of the body.
It is lateralized communication.
The same has now been seen when you do imaging on monkeys.
When they're communicating, there
is a bias towards the left hemisphere, the thickened area.
It's the start of the specialization.
Moreover, in both humans and in other apes and monkeys,
there is very, very close connections between the Broca's
area, or the pre-proto Broca's area in a monkey,
and all sorts of muscle groups having
to do with facial expressions-- intensely
intertwined connectivity there.
And that's that prosody stuff.
Seemingly, a monkey making some of it's emotionally loaded
vocalizations, there's some facial prosody
that goes along with it because the wiring is very, very
intertwined there.
And it's facial stuff that tends to be lateralized
to the right side of the face.
Finally, when a monkey in a brain imaging machine
is hearing vocalization of its own species,
the left hemisphere preferentially
activates in the proto equivalents of these areas.
And then, finally finally, what people
are beginning to see in skulls from ancient ancestors
like australopithecus is these really tough things
to infer very indirectly from endocasts of what would
be the brain inside the skull.
But australopithecus a million years ago or so,
already a little bit of an asymmetry
in the left hemisphere.
So this has been something that's
been developing in monkeys and apes for a long, long time.
Switching now from neurobiology, moving back--
there is hormones that are relevant,
and acute environmental whatevers.
But we're going to skip over those just
because a huge feature of the field
is language acquisition, language development
early in life.
And there, you have one of the great debates
in the field coming in around the 1960s or so, which
was between these two silverbacks
in this whole field, both of whom you've heard of before.
One, B.F. Skinner, the king of behaviorism
who probably was as most influential by the 1960s 1970s
or so, and Noam Chomsky, a champion of a very
different view of language.
Chomsky, who is still around, and who
to the extent that I can understand it,
revolutionized linguistics when he was about
four and a half years old.
And has been the dominant figure in the field
for 2/3 of a century since.
OK, so here was the basic matchup
in their wrestling match.
Behaviorist view-- you can already
construct what the behaviorist view of language acquisition
is going to be, which is you begin to make a sound,
attempting to learn a word.
And if you say it right, you get rewarded.
Oh, please feed me.
Very well said, I'm going to feed you now.
And now you've learned to say that.
[MUMBLING], you don't get fed.
And you get severely hypoglycemic.
And you try to find other, until you happen to stumble
on the right way to say it.
And, oh, I've been negatively enforced
when saying [MUMBLING].
And I've been positively-- and just do that all the time.
And that's how I learn language in a classic behaviorist
framework.
Chomsky, meanwhile, was taking a stance
that this bears no resemblance at all to what is going on.
And what we'll see is more versions of his view
have prevailed.
Basically, the behaviorist view was just sheer,
raving gibberish.
But this produced these fireworks
of debates between Skinner and Chomsky in the '60s and '70s.
Skinner was at Harvard.
Chomsky was at MIT.
And they were regularly lobbing missiles across at each other,
and shooting across their bows and stuff.
And this was this huge debate, simply
because behaviorism was so totally dominating
American psychology at the time with a complete stranglehold
that there was Skinner, and like three and a half other people
out there who had any sort of academic training
who would seriously argue that you acquire language
through standard behaviorist rules.
That was their extreme view, and a behaviorist sort
of standing in the sand on that one, and virtually no evidence
for it at all.
So what's the Chomskian view about, instead?
The very nature of language acquisition
shows that it is not behaviorist,
because of a very significant, critical thing that kids
do as they learn language.
A landmark somewhere along the way, 15 to 20 months of age,
this major, major event, the first time a child
says a combination of words that it's never heard before.
I like chocolate ice cream, says the child.
Now you say, oh, here, there's such a thing as Velcro ice
cream.
And the child after tasting it, never
before having heard the sentence, I like Velcro ice
cream, now says, I like Velcro ice cream.
It has just generated a language construction
that it has never heard.
The generativity of language, the possibility
that kids not only that business of a finite number of words,
but an infinite number of messages, but at some point
kids do something which is impossible
by strict behaviorism.
They generate examples of things they have never heard before.
And this is, in the Chomskian view,
this inflection point where something explosive exponential
occurs.
That's where it goes off.
And there was a Chomskyte disciple,
a guy named Roger Brown, who was a professor for many years
at Harvard, who did this insane, obsessive study to actually
demonstrate what everybody can infer, like, if they ever
had kids, which was having kids where
he and his band of researchers would keep track
of every single word kids would say
during their first year of life.
God knows how the parents put up with these people
hanging around in the nursery and stuff.
But what they showed was, yes, suddenly
you have kids generating language constructions
that they have never heard before.
And Chomsky has advanced a whole view
that there is an innate structure to language.
And this is one of the key bits of his argument, that
right around a certain point of development kids
are able to generalize the rules of language
into constructions they have never heard.
Moreover, kids are able to generalize
the rules of language when they have only got an imperfect
instruction by adults speaking around them who may not
be grammatically perfect.
And one individual may be off here
or there in one word, somebody off in another one--
if nothing else, not producing every possible combination.
And out comes a sense of the grammar from kids
when constructing rules out of imperfect examples,
and constructing completely novel combinations of words
that they've never heard before.
So the argument that has always been sort of
at the core of the Chomskian view
is when kids suddenly explode into this language
acquisition-- to give you a sense of this, there are long,
long stretches where you are learning about 10 words a day
during development.
By college, typical person has a vocabulary of 60,000 words.
You are not going to have gotten those 60,000
from behaviorist reward and punishment stuff.
What is this explosion about?
And what's always been an argument in favor
of the Chomskian notion that there is something innate,
there is innate drive towards language acquisition,
is what's called the poverty of stimulus argument, which
is stated quite simply, kids are generating
a lot more examples of language then they're hearing.
They're generating all sorts of things
that they have never heard.
This whole example here, kids have
to be learning in some prepared learning, ethological way.
And that's a term that definitely comes into the field
because they are generating constructions
they have never heard before.
They cannot possibly be taught to do that.
And they are not being sat down and being explicitly taught
the structure of grammar.
They are constructing rules out of imperfect, partial examples.
So that's always been a very strong argument.
And there's always been a counter argument
saying that you don't have to have
strict instruction of every single type of construction
of words that you generate.
You can have statistical learning.
You can pick up the rules from statistical patterns.
And you can do that with artificial intelligence
programs.
And you can do that with adults who could pick up patterns.
And a number of years ago, extremely cool study
showing that kids way before they
start using language-- six months of age or so--
can actually pick up statistical patterns in language.
How would they show this?
They would have a whole bunch of nonsense syllables, which
they would play long strings of them
at these kids where there would be combinations.
These two nonsense syllables, the first one
would be followed by the second one 100% of the time.
This combination would be followed 90% of the time.
This one 75, this one 10%, this one never,
and long strings of these, and showing
that kids would begin to learn the statistical associations.
How do you know?
Because you play a novel pairing.
You get one of these pairings where 90% of the time
you make this sound.
And it's followed by this on the tape.
Now, instead, you make this sound.
And it's followed by something it's never associated with.
And the kid's heart rate increases, because this
is a novel combination.
And it is not an all or none.
It is merely a statistical linking of the two.
So really young kids can do statistical learning,
picking up statistical patterns in language very different
than people would have guessed.
OK, so now let us take a five minute break.
And we will start marching through some
of the developmental landmarks and what the biology is of it.
What you see in terms of child development language
acquisition is one very clear phenomenon, which
is right at the beginning of life,
a kid could learn any single language out there.
There are hundreds and hundreds of different vowel
sounds in different languages, even more consonant sounds.
And any kid and can learn any language.
And what you see in a child in one to three months of age
is roughly equal response to any phonemes,
any sounds that are building blocks of language.
And what development is from there is you lose that ability.
As you begin to acquire your own,
you start being unable to hear the difference
between other sounds.
And, suddenly, you're back to taking biopsies out
of bears instead of pairs, depending
on what language you're in.
As you acquire your own language, virtually
by definition in acquiring it, you
are losing the capacity to hear vast amounts
of phonemic subtlety from all the other languages.
By three months of age, kids are already
beginning to preferentially pay attention
to a spoken language, rather than nonsense syllables.
They are already beginning to note structure of language
in terms of what they pay attention.
By three to six months of age, they're
already preferentially paying attention to vowel sounds.
They're beginning to learn that sounds are broken up.
They're beginning to do that statistical relationship stuff
of combinations of sounds.
Somewhere by about eight, nine months of age, babbling
starts, and, again, the business about babbling during sign
language showing that.
What you also see is when kids start babbling,
they tend to have stronger facial expressions
on the right side of their face--
that same argument about the left hemisphere beginning
to take some control over stuff.
What else?
By nine months of age, kids are beginning
to recognize structures, word combinations.
In terms of responding to them, they
are beginning to have lost an awful lot of their ability
to pick up phonemes from other languages.
By about 11 months of age, they are
beginning to generate the typical vowels, consonants
of their language.
And out of that pops language soon afterward.
OK, so a feature of language acquisition
in humans which is pretty bizarre
is that adult members of our species
sit around and invest huge amounts of energy
in a one on one level to in an intentional premeditated matter
help young ones acquire the communication of the species.
We do directed teaching of language.
And this is unique.
And it turns out, this is not what is found in most cultures
on this planet.
In most of them, kids pick up language purely
by observation, by hearing, by being witness to.
It is a relatively recent, Westernized invention--
I don't know maybe in the last 1,000 years
or so-- where you sit down children.
And you generate simple examples of the language, which
you present in a repetitive way, simple versions of words,
of grammar, were you direct it towards them,
and were you then correct their attempts at repeating it.
That's a relatively new invention.
And bizarrely enough, it's not entirely clear
if that accelerates language acquisition, which
would be a real drag after everyone
being tortured with phonics back when or some such thing.
This is a relatively new hominid invention.
It is relatively rare culturally.
And it's not so clear if it actually
accomplishes a whole lot.
Now, part of what you also find with kids beginning to not
be able to discriminate between two different sounds in what
will prove to be another language other than the one
they're learning, that begins to be when you're doing imaging
there, that Wernicke's is not distinguishing between the two
sounds in terms of its activation pattern.
That's where you're beginning to lose the ability
to hear universality of language sounds,
and instead begin to focus in on your own.
What else do you see?
Second languages-- where do second languages
fit in with this?
And there are all sorts of critical periods
of development with it, as to when it comes in.
One of the ones that everybody knows
is if you learn a language any time after roughly age 12
or so, most typically you will never
be able to speak it without an accent
for the rest of your life.
That seems to be one of the landmarks, exceptions, blah,
blah, the usual.
Nonetheless, that seems to be, generally, the pattern.
What about brain coding for a second language?
What is found is if you get a second language before roughly
six years of age, essentially if you were growing up bilingual,
both languages are coded in very overlapping regions
of Wernicke's and Broca's.
How can you see that?
Because you get individuals when they have a stroke
will get, for example, a comprehension aphasia in both
of the languages that they are native speakers of,
that they grew up with.
Learn a language after six, and what you typically see
is the Wernicke's area that does the second language tends
to be a more peripheral area.
And likewise, what's activating a Broca's, you're
not getting the center seats.
You're not getting the orchestra seats
for where you're doing a second language if it's coming in
later.
And, thus, you can get the truly bizarre cases
of people who get a very selective stroke
and will lose language and not the other.
So you begin to get that there.
What accents are about, what the critical period is on accents,
God knows.
But you have that coming in there by around age 12 or so.
Next, acquisition invention of new languages-- and this
is relevant in terms of child acquisition of language
because of what's a truism in the field, which
is new languages are invented by kids.
Adults do not invent new languages.
Adults may be able to go to the office each day
and decide whether this or that word
should be protected from the French language.
But languages are invented by kids.
And what you see with that is a standard pattern of age
distribution, of novelty, which is not only
do languages tend to be invented by kids.
But nobody a whole lot older than them ever
learns the new language.
New languages are invented by the young
and have lateral and downward transfer.
This is what you see.
Great example of this-- about 20 years ago in Nicaragua,
where for the first time after the revolution
there, for the first time there was anything
done in the country in the way of education
for deaf children, who otherwise were just
left to sort of languish in villages, and ignored,
and not educated, and all of that--
the first attempts to have schools
explicitly for deaf children.
And people there teaching them were
beginning to grow for OK, how are we going
to communicate with these kids?
What's going to be an efficient way?
And worth noting, in addition to American Sign Language,
there's British Sign Language.
And there's French Sign Language.
There's all different ones.
And what began to emerge after the first year
or so in the school was the kids came up
with their own language.
They began to generate their own sign language, which
over the subsequent generations became more and more
mature and sophisticated.
And we'll see ways in which that occurred.
And this is now Nicaraguan Sign Language.
This is the sign language that is taught to deaf individuals
there.
And this was invented by kids.
This emerged from the students there
while the adults were trying to figure out,
and having conferences, and meetings, about what
sort of sign to use for this.
And there are the kids in the dorms generating
their own language.
10-year-old kids was the average age there
where this was happening.
Language was invented by new kids.
And what you saw with the Nicaraguan Sign Language was it
took about three generations worth of school kids
to have a fully-formed grammar in the language
as complex of a grammar capacity for embedded clauses, all
that sort of thing, as you would find in any other sign
language.
It took about three generations.
And with each new elaboration, it
was whichever kids had come up with it, and everybody younger.
Even after a while, the original generation
who had invented Nicaraguan Sign Language,
that first generation, they weren't
very good at the later, fancier versions.
That same deal-- languages are invented by the young.
And languages are greatly shaped, and changed,
and modified by the young as well.
And there's not a whole lot of people
older than them who ever pick up on it.
So that's a pattern again and again.
So acquisition of language, what's going on in the brain
there?
Prenatally, you already begin to get-- OK, let's cut the brain.
There you have it.
There's the brain in cross-section,
cutting right through there.
And what we have, this is the left side,
is thickening of what would be Broca's, thickening
of Wernicke's.
It's around 12 to 16 weeks of age in a fetus
that you begin to see different patterns of gene expression
around here versus there.
And a couple of these are genes that have already
been identified to have mutations
in families with language production disorders.
So around then, begin to have differential gene expression.
By around 30 weeks, this part is now thicker than on this side.
You're beginning to get the structural asymmetry.
Interestingly, during the first few years of language,
you don't see enhanced metabolism
on this side relevant to that side when kids are talking.
Even amid the right side of their face
being more expressive, it's not until a few years
that you lateralize all the metabolic activation there.
Next bit of development that's pertinent
is that stuff about myelin.
Myelin, you remember the axons.
And you wrap them up with myelin.
And your frontal cortexes, which are not myelinated fully
yet in most of you guys.
What you see developmentally with language
is something not terribly Earth shattering,
which is kids tend to myelinate their Wernicke's
area about three months before they myelinate their Broca's
area.
Kids are starting to comprehend language
before they are producing it.
So Wernicke's is beginning to wire up
around nine months of age.
Typically, Broca's takes a few months past that.
That's the time course.
OK, so intrinsic neurobiology of language acquisition-- how
about social aspects, environmental aspects?
And right off the bat, we pick up
on something we heard, a couple of weeks
ago, that whole business about the importance of peer
socialization rather than parental influences.
And that's the work of that psychologist Judith Rich Harris
arguing that peer influences are far more
important than the literature has usually given credence to.
And the area where it is most clearly the case
is language acquisition.
And that was her whole point as to why kids grow up
with accents of the community around them,
rather than the absence of their parents
if the parents were not native speakers of that language.
Why do you pick up the accents of your peers around you
and those a little bit older?
Because peers are pretty important.
And back to that issue of it being
a relatively new invention for humans
to try to have somebody acquire language
by sitting them down, and instructing
them, and correcting their errors,
what most of language acquisition
has been about for a gazillion years in humans
is you learn from your older sibling, and your cousins who
are a little bit older than you.
And they learn from their cousins
who are a little bit older.
And that's where language is attained.
And you watch the adults, and listen to them.
We're very wired to pick up our language influences
from peer groups, and slightly older ones.
So her emphasizing right off the bat that remarkable deal.
When you think about it, it's totally amazing.
Nobody winds up with the accent of their home language.
They wind up with the accent of the community around them.
For the rest of their life, they may
be incredibly good at imitating their parents in the home
accent.
And, surprisingly early, as I mentioned,
they do not want to answer their parents in the home language.
They start preferring the outside language--
all this evidence of the strong peer socialization.
What's intrinsic in that is language acquisition
also involves a huge amount of inculcation
into the values of the society that uses that language.
And intrinsic in that is kids at very young ages
already getting embarrassed about their parents' accent,
and wanting to answer them not in the home language,
values built into that.
Examples-- one that we heard already back
in the aggression lecture, that whole business of languages
that have a formal you class, and an informal to and who
in French, for example.
And that business that after revolutions
as a value statement in terms of that pseudo kinship stuff,
everyone is supposed to use the informal structures there.
Everyone is supposed to use the informal conjugations.
Great thing in Tolstoy's autobiography
back when he was a kid-- apparently,
at one point, the family nurse, who adored him and had raised
him and all of that, one day sort of spoke to him
and used the informal verb tense in Russian.
And he threw a fit because she was not of his social class.
And how dare she use the informal.
She should be addressing him as the young master,
or whatever the Russian conjugation
equivalent was-- that one laden, laden with social values.
More examples of this-- different languages,
very different notions about relationships
expressed between people.
For example, in English you can be talking to a relative
and say something like my aunt, your mother.
Or you could be saying, my aunt, your grandmother.
And that's how you communicate it.
In certain languages-- for example one in the Malayan
peninsula-- what you find is if you were saying
my aunt, your mother, is a completely different word then
my aunt, your grandmother.
It is not possible to state a kinship
word without it reflecting also the person you're
speaking with.
You cannot talk about kinship terms outside of the context
of it being a conversation and interaction much,
much more indicative of intertwined relations there.
How is this?
Here's another example.
Here, you have in what would be termed egocentric languages,
like English, you refer to directions with respect
to your body.
It's over there, you say, indicating where it
is with respect to your body.
Where is that person standing?
Just behind him.
What you see in a lot of other languages,
less egocentric ones, is directions
are entirely a function of external landmarks.
And, thus, in a bunch of aboriginal languages
in Australia, you can't say something
like, oh, my right foot is on fire.
You can only say, oh, my foot that's
to the Northwest is on fire.
The world is based by external landmarks, rather than
ones that are internal.
Great example I heard of this from [? Leah ?]
[? Burdinksi-- ?] oh no, I just mispronounced her name,
I'm sure.
And that's shameful, given that it's a Russian name like mine.
But in any case, in the psychology department,
and telling me this great example that
you get in some of these non-ego language ones.
OK, we tend to think of stories going from left to right.
If you give somebody a bunch of tiles,
which is part of frequent IQ tests for kids,
and they make a story.
If you put them in the right sequence,
in English, what we do is we put the first scene on the left.
And it moves to the right from there.
Stories progress from left to right.
What you see in these languages that
are based by external cues, is stories begin in the east,
because that's where the sun rises.
So if you were sitting facing south,
and you were given the tiles, you
would put the story starting over here,
because that's where the sun comes up.
And if you were sitting, instead, facing north,
you would place the tiles starting
from the right to left, because the only pertinent direction
is nothing with respect to where your body is,
where your arms are.
Directions, things, start in the east.
And that determines things far more
than your body's orientation-- classic, very non-ego-centered
directionality in a language.
So that is very frequent.
So what begins to be intrinsic in all of this
is the notion that language shapes the way you think.
And this harks back to a grand old theory in linguistics
and language acquisition.
And two guys, early in the 20th century, Sapir and Whorf.
And the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis being that language constrains
thought, that your capacity for thinking,
the way in which you think, is constrained by the language
that you have been taught, the language you speak.
And that has been debated endlessly
in terms of just how much evidence is there
for that, versus how much the style of thought
shaped what the language is.
This has endlessly been debated.
And it's one of the hallmarks of what linguistics is about.
In the last decade, two traditional populations
in the Amazon that were studied that
are viewed as giving really major support
for a strict Sapir-Whorf notion that your capacity for thought,
the nature of your thought, is deeply shaped, potentially
deeply constrained, by language.
So these two trials-- the first is called the Paraha.
And the other is called the Murdruku, I believe.
And what you have in both of them
is a very different number system than we have,
than virtually every Western society does.
In the first group, the Paraha, their number system
consists of three numbers-- one, two,
and something bigger than two.
In Murdruku, it's essentially the same thing.
But it's five terms.
It goes up to-- six terms, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and all other numbers
that are bigger than five.
And I don't know completely what you
suggests about how often you have to count stuff down there.
But what it suggests is this is going
to be a very different relationship with numbers.
And what they show, studies with these folks,
is doing mathematical computations,
doing estimates, doing everything,
in the second tribe with numbers up to five,
the exact same level of accuracy as would a Westernized
individual.
But get above five, and accuracy goes down the drain.
Somebody in that society has a huge amount of trouble telling
the difference between six objects
and eight objects, eight objects and 10 objects,
because they all get bucketed as, how many are there?
It's the number that means more than five.
And in the first group, you see the same exact thing
for any number above three.
There's a lot of trouble being accurate distinguishing three,
from four, from five, and so on, because they all
have the same term.
They are that number that is bigger than two.
All of that occurring once you get above those numbers,
guesses essentially at the chance level.
So that's kind of impressive, and very interesting.
But maybe there's always this potential counter
interpretation as to what's happening there,
which is maybe these are not terribly sharp folks there,
and maybe have had all sorts of issues
with protein malnutrition, or cerebral malaria,
or God knows what.
No, because in each of these populations, each
of these cultures, they know thousands
of different types of edible plants and medicinal plants.
These are enormously sophisticated people
in those realms.
Numbers just aren't a big deal.
And what you see is somebody growing up in that society who
has not invented the language, but are instead acquiring it,
it constrains their ability to tell
the difference between the numbers
three and four-- very shaping in that regard.
So all sorts of people debating endlessly
how much does language shape the way you think?
How much does thinking shape the sort of language
you come up with?
But at the end of the day, there's
this whole philosophical business
that no matter how similar the language is that you're
using with someone else, it's going to mean something
slightly different to you.
And, thus, you have the flipside to our ethology sound bite.
Ethology is interviewing the animal,
but it's its own language.
Sort of the flip side, a quote once to the effect
of, if you could interview a lion in its own language,
you wouldn't have a clue what it was talking
about because communication is so intertwined with mind,
with values, with meaning, all of that, that it would
essentially be inaccessible.
And you hear about people who are multilingual.
How many of you are pretty adept at a second language?
Third language?
Any hands up there?
Whoa, OK.
So those of you who are really comfortable
in multiple languages, do you find
you have different emotional emotive
styles of communicating when you're switching languages?
Do you tend to have more expressivity in one of them?
Do you tend to be more analytical, whatever?
OK, I'm going to pretend that there was just
hundreds of faces going up and down agreeing with that stance,
because that's a well-known fact based
on years of teaching BIO150.
Yeah, languages serve different ,
functions and different emotions,
and different cognitions, very intertwined.
And at a true extreme, interviewing somebody
in their own language, even if it is the same language
that you ostensibly share with them,
you're not quite going to be speaking the same language.
Shifting now over to animals-- animal communication,
and in what ways is it completely
distinct from what we do?
And in what ways are there major overlaps?
It's going to be the same sort of themes
as with the sex lectures, the aggression lectures,
all sorts of things that people used to think
were unique to humans turn out to be less so.
For example, other species show the building blocks
of semanticity.
Semanticity, the fact that a discrete sound
can have meaning, and meaning distinctive enough that it
is separate from emotion.
We've already heard a great example
of this with the vervet monkeys who
could tell the difference between a vocalization saying,
something scary up in the air, get down,
and something scary down on the ground, get up in the tree.
These are in common in terms of the emotional content.
But in terms of the semanticity, the factual information
transmitted, they're diametrically opposite.
This is what a word is.
It is communicating a stable concept
that is independent of emotion.
Vervet monkeys have the starts of that.
It turns out chickens do that as well.
I have no idea what chickens emote about.
But they have different types of ones
that communicate information about what
they are being menaced by-- again, predator stuff.
Vervets, not only do they have a vocalization for scary raptor
up in the sky versus scary snake down on the ground,
but they have two vocalizations for one of them.
And I forget which, they have a synonym.
They have the building blocks of synonyms.
What else?
Animals and their communication systems
somehow have incorporated the fact
that facial expressions and auditory communication
go hand in hand.
How can you show this?
Take a rhesus monkey.
And show it a film clip of another monkey making
some vocalization with the facial expression
over and over, and then some other facial expression
and emotion where they tend to go together vocalization.
Now pop one up there where the monkey that is watching
is giving an alarm vocalization, and a come
groom me sort of smiley face.
And the monkey is immediately oriented.
And heart rate increases.
It knows that facial expression doesn't
go with that vocalization.
It's incorporated multi-modal pathways of communication
like that.
Something else that used to be thought
to be unique to humans-- intentionality
of communication.
I am making this sound not because I am terrified,
because I am happy, because I am hungry, whatever,
where I would be making that regardless of who else
is around.
I am going to communicate something only
if this person is around, but not that one-- intentionality.
And it turns out, you find that in other species as well.
You see that in vervets, for example.
Vervets will give alarm calls much more readily
when their relatives are around, then when
non-relatives are around.
Squirrels will do the same thing with alarm calls.
And if squirrels have been having aggressive interactions
with some other squirrel, they are
less likely to give an alarm call when a predator is around
than if it was somebody they liked.
There is intentionality in that realm.
What's implicit in that, at least some proto
building block steps of theory of mind.
So what else?
What things remain unique in human language?
Dramatic displacement-- that ability
to talk about things on the other side of the globe,
and things that never happened, and imaginary whatevers,
and philosophy, the arbitrariness,
the embedded clauses, the recursiveness.
And a very important thing about human language,
pretty uniquely-- the capacity to lie.
And that has to do with the arbitrariness.
You are human.
And you are in some confrontational situation.
And you are terrified out of your wits.
And the last thing you would do is say, oh my,
I am terrified out of my wits, because you do not
want to have the other individual know
that you are terrified.
What do you do?
You suppress the expression of emotionally revealing language.
Or you can even do something like start chest thumping,
and say all sorts of things implying anything but fear--
and, in fact, sort of bullying pugnacity.
And they're you're lying as well.
Humans have the capacity to do that.
A dog who is terrified is going to be terrified.
An animal that has a strong emotion
is going to give off pheromonal signals, for example,
depending on the species, that communicates it, no matter
how much that is not the thing they
want to be doing at the time.
And here's a great example of it.
You take a dog, one that's scared.
And it doesn't want to let an opponent know
that it's scared if this is some sort of dominance
confrontation.
And what it's doing if it's scared
is it's pumping out scared pheromones-- pheromones
with high levels of breakdown products, of stress hormones.
We know this already.
It's pumping them out.
And that's the last thing it wants to be doing.
It would love to be able to lie and say, no, I'm
not scared at all.
But it can't do it because there is not
an arbitrary relationship between being scared
and how it's communicated.
They are intertwined.
The same phenomenon of the scaredness is the signal of it.
They can't prevent the pheromones from coming out,
in terms of shutting down the glands.
So what does a dog do when it's scared
and it's giving off all these scared pheromones
from its anal glands?
It tries to shut down the glands.
It tucks its tail between its legs.
It tries to cover up the pheromone release.
And what does a dog do when its perfectly
content, and perfectly willing to let the rest of the world
know how its feeling about things?
It wants to spread those pheromones around it.
It rags its tail.
Dogs can't lie.
All they can do is try to put their hand over their mouth.
When they're about to say something revealing,
they tuck their tail between their legs.
So humans retain this capacity to lie.
Now, in terms of other species and what they can do,
what we transition to is a really interesting subfield
of this whole subject, which is attempts
to teach human languages to other species--
attempts to teach language to other primates.
And that has a long and storied past,
with all sorts of disastrous outcomes
and huge controversies getting at this issue of,
what sort of cognitive aspects of language
do we potentially share with another species?
OK, all of this has been with chimps
up until the last 20 years or so.
And it started off with a poor chimp
named Vicki who belonged to send researchers back in the 1930s.
And I forget who and where.
And what they decided was they were
going to teach Vicki to speak English, naturally,
and to speak.
And how were they going to do it?
Using the then cutting edge, just emerging principles
of behaviorism, Vicki was subject to behaviorist rules.
If she wanted water, she would have
to make a sound that vaguely sort of
sounded like the word cup.
She'd have to make this sort of exhaling, barky sort of thing,
which if your imagination really ran away with you,
would sound like the word cup.
There were a few other one syllable words
were they wouldn't feed her unless she
made whatever sound they said was close to the word food.
This was one screwed up chimp, in terms
of seeing films of this chimp.
This was one incredibly neurotic animal.
And thank God, after only a few years,
the researchers decided, you know, this isn't working.
And this poor animal was allowed not to have
to go through this anymore.
Oh, this doesn't work.
Soon after that, there was another chimp
that had one of these sorts of upbringings.
And this was raised by a psychologist named Kellogg
at, I believe, Yale.
And what this person was oriented to
was Judith Rich Harris' work on peer influences,
even though she wasn't born yet, the notion of peer influences.
Why couldn't Vicki learn English?
Because she didn't have a peer.
You need to have a chimp grow up with a human.
The two of them growing up together
with the exact same environment and same treatment,
and the human who's really good at acquiring language,
the chimp then will have a peer, will
have a role model, all of that, and we'll pick up English
as well.
And, thus, the Kelloggs raised their child, Donald.
Donald was raised with this chimp.
And I'm forgetting the chimp's name.
But Donald fared almost as poorly as Vicki.
And they did this whole study on the acquisition,
and studies of the two, and these whole books
written about Donald and his chimp brother there.
And what was supposed to be happening
was the chimp was going to learn English from Donald.
And what you saw developmentally,
the chimp, of course, was miles ahead of him.
The chimp was climbing trees while Donald was still cruising
on the couch kind of thing.
But in terms of language stuff, it never went that direction.
What wound up happening was Donald
started making vocalizations of the chimp, at which point
his parents stopped the experiment.
But this was totally nutty.
They were doing things-- like, they
did this experiment on auditory acuity in the two of them.
You could see this in the book.
They filmed them.
There's Donald, and I believe the chimp's name was Gua.
And the two of them were sitting there being perfectly
happy sitting on the lawn.
And they're were being filmed, high speed film.
And what does the damn father do?
He sneaks up behind them with a starter's pistol
and shoots it so that they can get on film which one of them
has the faster reaction time of being scared out of their wits
by their father shooting this thing behind them.
And what do you know?
Gua had slightly faster panic reaction stuff.
So this was something that, fortunately, hit a wall.
And Donald, I believe, wound up having a very interesting life.
And I don't think it was urban legends.
I wish I remembered.
But it made perfect sense, given what
a bizarre childhood he had.
OK, soon people realized they, or not so soon, then
in the 1960s some researchers finally
realized what the problem was with this,
which is it is absurd thinking that a chimp is going to learn
how to speak a language because they simply do not
have the larynx that can do it.
They do not have the larynx that could produce
discrete sounds like that.
It's impossible.
Not because they're not smart enough,
but they simply don't have the anatomy to do it.
And, thus, this was a couple, University
of Nevada named the Gardeners, who came up
with the brilliantly creative idea of teaching a chimp
American Sign Language to bypass the vocal limitations,
and just get at a system.
Chimps have great manual dexterity.
Tap at the cognitive aspects of language.
Bypass the sound vocals business.
And, thus, came the first sign language
ape, a chimp named Washoe.
Washoe was the darling of linguists,
psycholinguists a while, because there was something so,
so cool about a chimpanzee sitting there being
able to sign in sign language.
Washoe, by the time she was about a half dozen years old,
had acquired about 150 different signs in English.
And she could communicate with the Gardeners with it.
And people were producing these glowing sorts
of articles about them.
I remember this one guy, a science writer,
who happened to have deaf parents.
So he was raised bilingual with both English and American Sign
Language.
And this article about going to visit Washoe,
and the bizarrity of speaking to a chimpanzee
in his native language.
And how cool is that?
And Washoe was being reported to do a hallmark
feature of language use, which is
to begin to invent words, where she combined the word
water and the sign language for bird,
put them together, to water bird.
And that's what she called ducks.
Oh my God.
She's made a new term.
She babbled.
Before going to sleep, she would do her favorite signs
to herself, and babble herself to sleep.
She used sign language to lie, and to do all sorts of stuff
she shouldn't have been doing.
And Washoe lived in this trailer on the campus there.
And they often had this video camera up at night filming her.
And they would have a low light there.
And every now and then you would see things like,
there was a refrigerator there.
And Washoe was not supposed to open up the refrigerator
and steal food out of it at night.
And, suddenly, the camera is there.
And the trailer is absolutely quiet and empty.
And, suddenly, you see Washoe walking across, signing,
saying, quiet, Washoe, quiet, Washoe, and raiding
the refrigerator that way-- totally cool stuff.
They brought in a second chimp, a second chimp,
to have Washoe and the chimp start learning sign language,
and start talking to each other.
And a couple of months into it, they
had the first conversation in sign language
ever by another species.
The two chimps were sitting there, and facing
in opposite directions.
And they both made use of what in every one of these projects
was the first word that any chimp ever mastered,
which was tickle, because chimps love to be tickled.
And the first sentence they ever mastered
would always be tickle me, tickle me.
So there's the two of them, sitting Washoe and Bowie
I believe his name was.
And Washoe says, tickle me.
And Bowie says, tickle me.
And Washoe, tickle me, me, me, me, me.
And Bowie says, tickle me, tickle me, tickle me.
And, finally, the two of them get up and walk off
in opposite directions.
There you have failed detente in the very first conversation
there.
So my God, they're even talking to each other.
This is totally cool.
Meanwhile, a guy at the University of Pennsylvania
named David Premack had his chimp named Sarah.
And he was very irritated about the imprecision
of sign language.
He was teaching Sarah a symbolic language
pattern of different shaped magnetic tiles,
and showing very rigorously that Sarah could do if-then type
clauses, could begin to do embedded clauses,
saying things like, he would put up
the sign saying, if the red ball is in the bucket,
go hoot crazily in joy.
And Sarah would be able to do this, and be
able to construct these as well-- nothing very much
resembling the fluidity of language,
but nonetheless showing really sophisticated structure to it.
So these guys were rolling along.
And everybody loved this.
And this was the greatest stuff ever,
chimps speaking American Sign Language.
And you could hang out with them, and tickle them.
And they'd never tickle you back, apparently.
But showing interviewing an animal in its own language,
none of that reciprocity of tickling stuff with a human.
But then, then, along came the ape
to end all apes when it came to sign
language, Koko, Koko the gorilla.
Koko the gorilla started off her linguistic life here on campus.
Koko was originally a gorilla up in the San Francisco Zoo.
And a graduate student, by now I can't remember how
many decades ago, named Penny Patterson in the psychology
department decided that for a bunch of reasons
gorillas were going to be a lot more focused.
Compared to gorillas, chimps all have ADD.
And Koko was going to be the one.
And she managed to get a loan of Koko
from the San Francisco Zoo.
And apparently during that era, like half the days
you could be going around campus and there
would be Koko going by on a bicycle with Penny
Patterson or some such thing.
So Koko is this baby growing up here on campus, totally cool.
Koko begins to learn American Sign Language.
And that was clear was this was the ape of all time when
it came to learning American Sign Language.
Koko was amazing.
Koko was learning stuff.
Patterson was reporting the most astonishing things.
Koko could report dreams.
Koko could gossip, could gossip as
in there would be two people on the project
who, like, had a fight in front of her in the morning.
And later in the day, she could tell one of the other humans
that the two of them were having some fight thing or whatever.
Koko could gossip in American Sign Language.
Koko could do anything.
Koko could philosophize.
Koko could lie like crazy, of course,
because all of these chimps and apes
immediately began lying like crazy.
Here's one of the things she was reported as doing.
So Koko is left alone in this room.
And there's a potted plant there.
And nobody's around.
And Koko being a gorilla, what does she do?
She looks around.
There's nobody there.
So she eats the plant.
So after a while, in comes Patterson, and says,
what happened, in sign language, to the plant?
Where's the plant?
And Koko, who has been caught red-handed
here, Koko says, Bill ate it.
Bill, the poor bastard grad student on the project,
oh, blame the grad student.
So Patterson says, don't tell me that.
Bill's not a gorilla.
Humans don't eat plants.
Gorillas only eat plants.
And Koko sits there and says, some other gorilla,
some other gorilla.
So this was amazing.
Koko was just the best.
So, suddenly, Koko was like double dating with Madonna,
and endorsing [INAUDIBLE], and aerobic exercises,
and the Koko diet, and things of that sort.
And it was totally great.
And this was the best gorilla ever.
And this was the best ape.
And they brought in this male who
was supposed to, like, knock up Koko
so that she could have a baby and teach her baby sign
language, a multi-generational gorilla teaching
philosophy to their children.
And all of this was great.
And then around 1980 all of it got ruined.
And it got ruined by a guy at Columbia named Herb Terrace.
Terrace had been another one of the ones starting
one of the sign language chimp projects.
And he started with a chimp who was
going to disprove Noam Chomsky, who argued that there was
no way anything that these chimps and gorillas could do
would actually count as language.
He was going to prove him wrong.
With his chimp who, he named Nim Chimpsky,
to disprove Noam Chomsky.
So there was Nim Chimpsky.
And Nim Chimpsky starts learning American Sign Language,
like all the other ones.
And Nim Chimpsky, as opposed to, like,
Washoe, who's living out there in the American West, and
manifest destiny and all of that,
Nim Chimpsky lived in a townhouse up on the west side
of Manhattan, and was a regular favorite
at Lincoln Center, and Zabar's and all of that.
And the person who got the bagel probably
knows what I'm referring to, but nobody else does.
And Nim was just growing up there,
and learning sign language.
And Nim was great.
And Nim was terrific, and learning just as fast
as the other ones.
And, actually, the summer after my freshman year,
I spent the summer working with Nim, which was incredible fun,
and tickling him, and him not tickling me back.
And it was all so exciting, and getting to do this
all day long with a chimp.
And moving on, and then Terrace and crew
beginning to expand on this.
And then, suddenly, about three years later,
out comes this big landmark paper in Science
by Terrace and some of the colleagues
there basically saying, you know what?
Nim is totally cool.
And he is a blast to spend a long weekend with,
and that sort of thing.
But he's not learning language.
This really doesn't count.
And you know what?
None of the other ones are either.
And what you had was the first real hard-assed analysis
of what these animals were producing.
And what Terrace demonstrated in this paper in great detail
was nothing Nim was doing fit the criteria for language.
Nim was not inventing words.
Nim was not getting word ordering correct.
Word ordering was basically at the random level.
Me eat, and eat me, 50% chance of either
when expressing the same notion.
Nim was failing to do something that
was very fundamental to language,
which was the more words in your string, the more meaning to it.
And what I have on the handout at the very top
was some famous quote from Nim who was just
babbling on something incoherent,
suggesting like a Broca's aphasia,
except that he was fine.
As the utterances got longer, they
didn't contain more information.
Moreover, the utterances were not spontaneous.
Language is not about answering questions.
Language is about choosing to communicate.
Nim was not generating any of this.
He was responding to, if you answer this,
you will get a fruit loop, which is what he mainly ate.
And, thus, most of the people on the project
were constantly stealing his fruit loops from him.
So this looked pretty bad.
And what Terrace then proceeded to do
was the same analysis on all the other projects.
And none of the chimps were doing anything.
All of them were failing these same criteria
of accurate word ordering, expanded
meaning with longer utterances, spontaneous, all of that.
Washoe, oh, coming up, the duck is a water bird.
Washoe was saying, water, bird.
No, it had not just neologistically come
up-- if that's the word-- with a new word for duck
in American Sign Language.
It wasn't doing that.
The word ordering made no sense.
It was completely random.
Terrace rips apart the whole literature.
So out of that emerges the great, bloodied prizefight
of 1983 between Terrace and Penny Patterson.
Penny Patterson, who had by that point
had stolen Koko from the San Francisco Zoo--
and you think I'm kidding.
She had been promised Koko for only a certain number of years.
And then, of course, she was going to give him back.
And when it was time for her to give him back, she said,
I'm not giving him back because he has human values now.
And it would be unfair for him to live with a gorilla.
So that was just on the edge of being a lawsuit built around
whether or not Koko could be emancipated
along the lines of having human values,
because she had been, like, skating
on Lake Lagunita when it was frozen, or things like that.
And the San Francisco Zoo, seeing a public relations
disaster on the horizon, decided, what the hell?
Let's give Koko, let's give this $60,000 gorilla
to Penny Patterson, who by that point
had pretty much had her association with Stanford cut,
and by then was up in the Woodside
Hills at a large estate paid for by gorilla enthusiasts,
and hanging out there with Koko.
So Patterson winds up being the strongest defender
down to the end that this is real language that Coco
is doing.
And Terrace, going completely after it-- and one problem
at that point was there were no actual data that had ever
been published by Patterson.
All there were, were some several heartwarming films
of Koko, Koko and global warming,
and Koko and the trade deficit, and Koko and this or that.
And there were no data.
Scientists couldn't make any sense of it
because there were no numbers.
There was no anything you can actually analyze.
And when you look at the films.
And they would be pitiful.
They would be pitiful.
Koko would be sitting there, for one thing,
would never be generating spontaneous utterances.
Koko would be sitting there having the same word order
randomness as all the chimps.
Koko would be having-- and part of the problem
was Patterson kept enabling Koko.
She would ask Koko, what do you call this thing?
And Koko would come up with a completely wrong sign.
And Patterson would say, oh, stop kidding around.
And then Patterson would show her the next one.
And Koko would get it completely wrong.
And Patterson would say, oh, you funny gorilla.
And then-- I'm really serious.
And I mean it this time.
And so when she gets it wrong again.
And, oh, Koko, is being so ironic.
What?
What are you talking about?
She's going on like that in these films here.
And as you look closely using the sort of criteria
that Terrace was using, your socks new more
American Sign Language than this gorilla did.
it's showing none of the spontaneity,
none of the word ordering, none of any of that stuff.
So out came the knives.
And here were the basic stances.
Terrace's stance was Patterson wouldn't
know a controlled experiment if it hit her over the head.
Patterson's response was, Terrace
was this cold, affectless fish who had driven Nim
into virtual autism.
And this guy Terrace was not someone
who you would want to sort of cozy up and on his lap
and have him tell you bedtime stories or whatever.
And another feature that Patterson pointed out very,
very accurately was Nim had no continuity of teachers.
Nim had all sorts of people who knew three and a half
more words of sign language than he did-- like me, for example--
who would show up for a summer, and then disappear.
He was going through 20, 30 different teachers a year.
Oh, that's not a very good setting for learning stuff.
That's not ideal.
Language is not just about language.
It's about the emotional relationships.
And Nim ultimately wound up being a pretty screwed up
chimp in terms of like nobody stable in his life
except for this cold fish Terrace who
basically didn't like him.
So it's going back and forth, and these accusations.
And Patterson coming out with just incredible stuff,
and Terrace going after her.
And then things got really dirty,
Patterson beginning to suggest that maybe Nim
wasn't playing with a full deck compared to the other-- oh,
so Terrace got the stupidest chimp in the entire literature
there, and did the best analysis on his inadequacies,
and is trying to take down the whole field-- totally messy,
messy sort of conflict there.
And pretty much the whole field collapsed
in the aftermath of it.
Patterson is still up in the hills of Woodside.
Although I hear rumors she's about to move
to Hawaii with Koko to a large estate
that she's gotten somebody to give her.
She sends out things like newsletters talking about Koko
sends greetings for world peace, and things of that sort.
I met her once.
And she wanted to talk about this gorilla Michael
was brought in who was supposed to mate with her.
But they brought him in when he was too young.
And they did a kibbutz brother and sister deal instead,
and just did folk songs together.
And Michael wasn't working.
He wasn't mating with her.
So they eventually brought in this big, larger male.
And Michael promptly died of heart disease,
which I thought probably had a major stress component.
And that seemed perfectly legitimate,
and was talking with that.
And then was informed that October
is going to be really tough, because the end of October
is Michael's birthday.
And Koko is going to have a really hard-- saying,
is anybody else hearing this?
Am I the only one hearing this who
thinks something is off here?
They have continued there.
And Terrace pretty much took down the rest of the field.
In the aftermath, and the remnants of it,
there remains one chimp who I think legitimately
qualifies as using something beginning
to resemble true language.
And this is a bonobo chimp named Kanzi.
And Kanzi, they are doing everything right.
It is clear that Kanzi is incredibly smart.
They are doing all sorts of data analysis.
And Kanzi is learning stuff.
Kanzi is doing embedded clauses.
Kanzi does if-then stuff, logical progressions.
Kanzi is able to do a whole bunch of things.
Kanzi can do analogy.
Small ball is to small bucket, as big ball is to--
and she will indicate big bucket.
She can do analogies like that.
And most intriguingly, not only is Kanzi
generating language, and spontaneous and all of that,
is that when Kanzi makes mistakes identifying things,
they tend to be within semantic categories.
She accidentally comes up with the sign for apple
when she means to say orange.
She doesn't accidentally come up with the sign
for existentialism when she means to say orange.
It's semantic categories, exactly the sort of stuff
you need.
So at this stage, most of that field went down in flames.
At one point, people were making a big deal out of the fact
that there's not a whole lot of gorillas left on Earth.
And when, supposedly, Koko and Michael
were able to be talking their hearts out with each other,
when you calculated those two gorillas, and the total number
of gorillas on Earth, and how many people speak American Sign
Language, and how many people on Earth there are,
a greater percentage of Earth's gorillas
were speaking American Sign Language than Earth's humans.
Like, that was stuff coming out at that time.
So the entire field has collapsed.
Kanzi remains about the only hope
for making sense of anything going on
with this-- really appealing, seductive stuff, not
a whole lot of science.
 Variety of announcements, tomorrow, office hours
are shifted because at 4:30, there's
a really interesting lecture over at Clark.
This guy is one of the experts on the whole notion
that there are brain metabolic abnormalities
in sociopathic humans, violent criminals.
He's got the distinction of having the world's only
portable MRI.
He has a big old Winnebago with an MRI machine.
And he drives all around the country
from one maximum security prison to another,
trying to look at aspects of frontal cortical dysfunction
in extremely violent individuals.
I have no idea if he's a good lecturer or not,
the material is going to be really interesting.
So that's something that probably should
be caught Friday, again, is not going
to be videotape, but just audiotape
for a number of reasons.
Finally, over next year, I will be doing,
if anyone is interested, some directed readings
with people that are-- that will be essentially
more of an exploration of some of the topics in the course
here.
So if you are interested, do not send me anything whatsoever
until it's the summer.
At that point, CV, transcript, anything I need to know,
but it will be posted on the coursework,
so as to more details about it.
So we pick up with the homestretch here of language.
And what we got to just on the edge of two days ago
is the now begin to look at the genetics of language use.
In general, there's the usual types of techniques
for behavior genetics.
The first is looking for covariance
of certain language abnormalities
in certain families.
And the evidence for that is clear with Williams syndrome,
with the selective language impairment.
Those tend to run in families and they
tend to show classical Mendelian inheritance,
very readily thought of as genetically
influenced disorders.
Then, going to our usual deal of looking
at adopted individuals, twins, identical twins separated
at birth, that whole armamentarium
of behavioral genetics stuff, what does that show?
There's a fair degree of heritability
of things like vocabulary complexity, ability to spell,
skill at phonology, things of that sort.
In general, the evidence is pretty
poor for a strong genetic load on dyslexias,
on learning disorders of that type.
Of course, the modern version of it
all is to start looking at the actual genes,
the molecular biology of language disorders, of language
in general.
First thing that comes up is this gene
that has been at the center of the whole field for years now,
a gene called FOXP2.
And it was originally identified as having a mutation
in a family that had a very specific linguistic problem
running through it, language generation speech.
This family had severe problems with it,
classic looking for a genetic marker,
and eventually narrowing down to the gene
itself, turning out to be this mysterious gene FOXP2, which
turned out to be a transcription factor,
and a mutation in it in this family.
What immediately became clear is this theme
over and over again with language,
in so far as there's a problem in this family,
is it at the cognitive level of what language
is about symbolically or is it just getting your lips
and tongues and articulating and that much more
mechanical level.
It initially looked like it was much more
the latter in this family.
It is apparently more of a mixture of both,
just to make things really confusing.
What you see is it is preferentially
expressed in that part of the brain
we heard about the other day, the basal ganglia.
That area that's playing a role in gesturing when you're
speaking, playing a role in facial prosody,
that sort of stuff, motoric stuff, and the fact that it was
found so heavily expressed in there
was part of what got people to think what's fundamentally
wrong with this family is motor aspects of language production.
Again, it's gotten messier since then
because these folks have a variety
of cognitive impairments in the realm of language.
So, of course, immediately, what we need to be asking
is what's FOXP2 doing in other species.
Does it occur in other species?
And it turns out that it is all over the place.
You find FOXP2 in birds and mammals
and all sorts of things, large and small.
It is very, very widespread.
But, importantly, a different version than you
find in humans.
It is immensely conserved, which is
to say you see the same version of FOXP2
ranging from apes to birds, everything in between.
Nothing has changed with that evolutionarily
in a long, long time.
So what does it do?
A handful of studies in animals where the gene has been knocked
out, it has been removed, where you now have
mice that do not have the gene.
And what you see is there is less of vocalization
and simpler vocalization.
And that's back to our whole world
of that subsonic vocalizations that you
can't hear when mice are giggling
and that sort of thing.
Knock out this gene, and there's less vocalizing
and there's less complexity to it.
So we're just doing something or other that looks plausible.
And it's expressed in motoric parts
of the brain preferentially in these other species.
So this super conservative version
of this gene, everybody else has the same version.
And then you look at the human version
and there's a bunch of differences
and they emerged very recently, best estimates
are the last couple of 100,000 years.
Each one of the changes extremely
positively selected for, whatever this gene is about,
once it sort of went on the human path,
it changed real fast under major selective advantageous
conditions.
And thus, we've got a real different version
from everyone else.
The next interesting thing about it,
in so far as it is a transcription factor, when
you look at the genes that it regulates-- so this is now
taking her step further, our old genetic network deal,
when you look downstream, what genes it regulates,
they tend to be fairly differentiated
from other primates and to have differentiated
as a result of positive selection.
So this is a whole cluster of genes
that evolution was doing some pretty stringent things
on in hominids in the last couple of 100,000 years.
Now, what you do is one of the all-time cool studies, which
was last year, which you take mice
and you knock out their FOXP2 gene.
And now, you stick in the human version.
And, amazingly, what happens is once these animals mature,
they speak just like Mickey Mouse.
People were listening.
What you wind up seeing is-- it's probably
the Disney people probably are working on it,
and that's going to be the end of life
as we know it when they let those ones lose.
What you get when you overexpress-- when you express
the human FOXP2 in a mouse is a mouse
with more vocalizations and more complex ones.
Whoa, that is mighty interesting area of lots and lots of work
these days, trying to figure out what this transcription
factor is about.
But, clearly, just this screaming imprint
of major league selection that has gone on
for the human version and for the genes
that it regulates, fairly recently, it
is no surprise that this gene is central to such
a different unique thing that we're doing.
More evidence for genetic components of the language,
and this one is a very indirect one
with this totally interesting phenomenon that
has been shown in lots and lots of different places
on the globe.
So you get some circumstance where a whole bunch of people
are brought together from different cultures,
with different language groups, and why they're
having to deal with each other.
Classic version is you get, for example, slave populations
brought from different places in West Africa
to some of the Caribbean islands.
You have, on some of the Hawaiian Islands,
early in the last century, people from all over Asia
are brought over to worth the plantations there,
the fields, whatever.
What you have in these cases, there's
a whole bunch of people thrown together who
have languages from every which way
who don't understand each other.
And what always emerges, what has
been extremely well-documented, is some sort
of fragmentary communication system that
is made up of bits and pieces of all the relevant languages,
which everybody can kind of limp through and begin to be
understood with each other.
And what that is wounds up being called is a pidgin language.
Pidgin, very simplistic version that shows virtually nothing
in the way of complex grammar, and it's basically
a vehicle for getting individuals
who almost always, in these cases,
are societally pretty under the foot of powers that
be to deal with each other, to work with each other,
working out this proto proto communication system
with fragments of each language.
That's not surprising.
What is totally cool is what happens next over the next one
to two generations, which is this pidgin thing,
this committee glued together amalgamation
of fragments of different languages
within a generation or two has evolved
into a real language, which is then
known as a creole language.
Creole languages are languages that
are a couple of generations descended from pidgin.
And what you see is it winds up being a real language.
That's fine, that's fine, given that, two days ago, we're
hearing that it was possible for kids
to come up and invent Nicaragua in sign language
within a generation.
So you start with this pidgin thing,
and within a couple of generations,
it turns into a real language, fits the rules,
grammar, all of that.
Here is the thing that is so interesting
about this phenomenon, which is all of the creoles have
the same grammatical structure.
What is that about?
Creoles from all over the planet that
were built upon all sorts of differing
hodgepodge of the original languages in the pidgin, Creole
languages all have a similar grammatical structure.
Easy explanation, easy boring one, which is it's
very simple grammatical structures and this
is a language that's just getting off
its feet in each case.
No, in all these cases it is grammatical structures
that are not necessarily the simplest.
It's not just some baby step languages.
It's languages that all seem to come up
with the same graphical structures there.
And what this has given rise to is the notion
that there is a default grammar built into humans.
Let humans go running with a whole bunch of fragments
in different languages and, not surprisingly, we
were able to turn it into a real communicative system
within a generation or two.
And when pulling language out of thin air,
humans always tend to come up with the same sort
of grammatical structures that are not necessarily
the simplest, argument there being there is an innate,
there is a hard wire, there is an ancient pattern of grammar
that humans use when they come up with a language.
So totally interesting.
What you find, also, with the sign languages,
as they get invented, Nicaraguan sign language,
it went through a first generation
of being pidgin, and soon turned into a signing
equivalent of creole.
And it has some of the same grammatical structures.
Even when humans are defaulting into a new language that's
purely gestural, it shows some of these constraints
that you see with the creole languages.
Other features of this that come through,
apparently, there's like 24 different ways that you
can put together objects, and subjects, and rejects,
the participles, and whatever it is, grammatical structures.
This guy, Joseph Greenberg, linguist,
who was here at Stanford until a few years ago when
he died, apparently, incredible titan in the field,
he did some of this research.
There's 24 possible different ways
languages can do this object subject business,
and all across the earth, all across the 6000 languages
there, you only see 15 of them used.
And the vast majority of grammars on earth
only use four of them.
So the argument there winds up being this
is a pretty nonrandom skew.
Again, we're seeing some kind of prepared learning default
grammars, this very imprecise sense of there's
something genetic floating around here.
So that complementary to the whole world
instead of looking at things like FOXP2
and this mutations, the usual two very different approaches.
That whole pidgin to creole transition
is really, really interesting and it really has this feel
in the undercurrents of it that there is a basic human grammar
that floats around there, a notion
that Chomsky has pushed for a long, long time.
Jumping one box further back, ecological factors
and language.
I'm going to touch on that only briefly, but what you've got
is something similar to a theme we heard a couple of weeks ago,
which is possibly not something we heard a couple weeks ago
and we'll instead hear on Friday.
But what you see is diverse ecosystems,
very biodiverse ecosystems.
Rain forest ones, for example, produce
cultures which have a great deal of diversity in them.
What we're going to see on Friday,
the version of that, which I'm now
thinking I did mention before, is that polytheistic cultures
are the things you tend to see coming out of rain forest
settings, that notion that if there's hundreds, if there's
a thousand different types of edible plants in your world,
it doesn't take a great leap to decide there's
a whole lot of different spurred things in the world going
on there.
Polytheism, a very similar theme,
great work done a few years ago, a guy named William Sutherland
from the University of Dundee, I think, where what he showed
was looking all over the planet, looking
at the biodiversity in different regions
on the planet, the more ecological diversity,
the more linguistic diversity you would find in that region.
The more different languages, which, of course,
thus translates down into small groups, small numbers
of speakers, this is an interesting phenomenon,
which it's not completely clear to me what to make of that.
But ecosystems that are very diverse
generate an abundance of theistic notions
and at above expected rates and also produces
a whole lot more languages, something on the diversity
there.
What his work then showed is about everything else
I'm going to say in this area, which is just
totally depressing stuff, which is linguistic diversity is
going down the tubes faster than biodiversity.
He shows that the rate of language extinction
proportionately is faster than the rate of extinction
of various species, plants, etc.
In these rain forest ecosystems, totally grim,
depressing picture.
What seems to be the case, given where things are heading,
is in the next century, in this century,
90% of Earth's languages will go extinct.
The vast majority of humans on this planet
speak less than 10 different languages
out of the 6,000 existing ones.
How's this for depressing?
There's a couple of hundred different languages that
are Inuit, and Northwest Native American,
and some other population as well.
And currently, only of 5% of those languages
have speakers who are not elderly.
That's real depressing.
Also, and something that strikes me as extraordinary
is, in each one of those cases, somewhere along the way,
there's going to be somebody in old age
who's the last person on earth who understands their language.
There's not a single other person alive
who will be able to talk in their mother tongue with them.
Language is disappearing left and right,
along with, of course, cultural diversity
going down the tubes, the process
of turning the whole world into a lowest
common denominator of McDonald's culture, blah, blah.
Along with that comes a huge, huge loss
of language diversity.
Finally, jumping to our last box,
if we're talking about ecological factors,
thinking about things like genes,
thinking about things like highly, highly
driven positive selection for genes like FOXP2
in humans, of course, we have to talk about the evolutionary end
of things.
So evolution of language and humans, general notion
is click languages, which you tend to see in hunter gatherers
in Africa, that that might have been the earliest
forms, the most ancient types of languages on Earth.
And what you also see is hunter gatherers are probably
the most ancient sort of populations of humans that
live in Africa, with waves of agriculturalists coming
from North Africa, the Middle East, at later points,
pastoralists coming from around there as well.
The original populations in Africa were hunter gatherers.
And they have high frequencies of these click languages.
That might be the starting point for human language.
Interestingly, though, you also see click languages
among a lot of aboriginal groups in Australia.
What does that tell you?
Those became separately.
There was a huge gulf of time between leaving
Africa and the first populations winding up in Australia,
convergent evolution.
For some reason, click languages is a very fundamental way
that people come up with communication systems.
So selection issues often run in with
our social biological notions of language advantages,
it's easy to see what the advantages are
of having a language system.
It is easier to store, to archive, knowledge,
information.
It is easier to coordinate hunts.
It is easier to figure out what we did the last time there
was a famine, figuring out things like that, all of those
facilitated by language.
In the memorable words of Steve Pinker from Harvard,
"Language is how we outsmart plants."
Language allows us to do all sorts of organizational stuff.
Language evolution is all about sequence.
We don't say a words simultaneously.
It's all sequences.
And a number of people have emphasized
that's what the construction of tools are about also.
The whole process of careful logical sequential transitions
of steps almost certainly tool use and language use
is sequential processes emerging in parallel.
Finally, obviously, you see all sorts of room for cooperation
with kin selection, cooperation with reciprocal altruism being
enhanced with communication.
But very importantly, for our game theory world,
what language also allows you to do
is lie, that whole business from two days ago.
In human language, there's that arbitrariness.
There's a dissociation between the message and the messenger.
It's not like dogs that have to put
the lid on their fear pheromones by tucking their tale.
What you have is the capacity to lie.
And, of course, running off from that, a whole world
of evolutionary strategizing.
Pertinent to that, there's a huge, huge disproportionate
share of neurons in the motor system devoted
to facial expressions, and mouth coordination,
and all that kind of world.
A really good thing if you plan to lie
is to be able to have good control
over your facial expressions.
Finally, formal game theory models
showing when you have pairs of individuals playing
against each other, when you introduce,
when you allow the emergence of communication
between two of the players versus not
in the other group, you immediately, no surprise,
have been getting a big advantage.
If you allow them semanticity, to have words
that they can communicate, that is advantageous,
that improves outcome.
Even better is if you allow semanticity and structure,
syntax, grammar, so that they can have
more complex communication.
All of those wind up being things
that facilitate winning in game theory settings.
Finally, interesting parallelism,
back to that biodiversity stuff, which
is, when you look at all those different possible grammatical
structures, the 24 of them, 15 of which
is the total of what appears on Earth,
the rarest of the grammatical structures
are the ones that are closest to extinction.
The rarest not in terms of the number of people
speaking it within a population, but the structures
that have occurred the fewest number of times in cultures
across the planet are the ones that
are in cultures where the languages are
most readily to be a lost, some sort of connection there.
And thus, you've got some sort of
weird grammatical imperialism that
has emerged over the years.
Again, what strikes me as a totally depressing number,
90% of Earth's languages will disappear in the next century.
So now we jump.
We jump to our next topic, which was
our first psychiatric disease.
And to remind you from two days ago,
we're not going to have a depression lecture.
The depression chapter in the zebra's book
will tell all the same stuff in much better, more clear terms,
I say, proving my point.
And what you should do is read it with as much attention
to it as if it has been a lecture subject.
It is an important subject, enough hints.
So check that one out.
What we focus on today though is schizophrenia.
And we're going to take our same old strategy,
starting off with what is the disease look like.
And as you will see, all sorts of surprises in there,
and then what goes on in the brain
just before early development, prenatal, genes, evolution,
the whole deal there.
We know this drill once again.
So starting off, making sense of schizophrenia,
as a bunch of behaviorists, you've
got a challenge right off the bat, which
is lots of people use the word schizophrenic in an every day
sense that has no resemblance whatsoever
to its actual technical use.
Schizophrenic, or schizian-- we all know that one.
We've thought, my God, I am having such a schizi day.
I overslept, I missed my first class, it was terrible.
I totally screwed up, but then I found out
I got this great grade on a midterm,
but then I had this fight with a friend,
but then in the afternoon, and then this crashed,
and, blah, blah.
God, what a schizoid day I'm having.
No resemblance to how the term's actually used.
That's not any sort of real term in psychiatry.
Whatever the schizi days are that we all
experience now and then, schizophrenia
is something else.
On the most technical level, schizophrenia
is a disease of people where, when you start talking to them,
within two or three sentences, you
realize there's something strange with their thinking.
They're not thinking normally.
They're not communicating normally.
On the most fundamental level, that's what the disease is.
Obviously, far more precise than that, schizophrenia,
disease of thought disorder, disease
of inappropriate emotion, disease
of inappropriate attribution of things, and what you'll see
is this is not just some sort of generic craziness in the way
that that word means nothing whatsoever.
There are typical structures to the ways in which things
are not working right in the behavior of schizophrenics,
which we'll hear about in a bit.
Part of what begins to bring that across
is the obvious fact that there's no way
that schizophrenia is just one disease,
because there's all sorts of subtypes.
It is a bunch of heterogeneous diseases.
You have a subtype paranoid schizophrenia,
where what it's all about is thought disorder built
around a sense of persecution.
You have catatonic schizophrenia,
where the person is in a frozen state,
immobile for long periods of time.
You have schizoaffective disorders,
which is kind of a mixture of schizophrenia and depression
disorders.
It's not just one disease.
So the whole array of behavioral symptoms
we're going to look at now, remember, some of them
are more common in different subtypes than others.
This is just the first broad overpass.
So beginning to make sense of the disease, what
it is, above all else, is a disease
of cognitive abnormalities, of abnormal sequential thought.
And the term that's given for it is loose associations.
All of us can tell a story where we have a pretty good ability
to put it sequentially and have the facts go in a way
where it will make sense to any other listener.
You do not see this in schizophrenics.
Sequential thinking is greatly impaired.
And instead of having logical sequences of information
that they give, things tangent all over the place,
bouncing around all over, where, in retrospect, you
can kind of see how they might have gotten
from A to Z, although most people would have gone
from A to B at that point, the tangential thinking
being another term for it, the loose associations.
So what do you wind up seeing there?
You get schizophrenics, for example,
who get terribly confused in a sentence,
whether when they are hearing about boxers,
they are unable to keep straight within one sentence
to separate out whether they're talking about a dog
or they're talking about an occupation.
Because they slip back and forth between the two.
Confusion between being a caddy, a caddy,
someone who a golf whatever, and a Cadillac, short term
for that.
All sorts of ways in which they can't hold on
to the sequential logic.
And, instead, there's just this tangenting,
getting caught up in the loose associations.
You're talking about a boxer, if you were a schizophrenic,
you were talking about a particular boxer,
you follow that sport whatever, and, suddenly,
you are expressing an opinion about how
that person would do in a ring against a St. Bernard.
And you're often talking about dogs
from there, just getting caught by a loose association
between the sound of the word and its multiple meanings,
going off the tracks on that, so the loose associations.
Next, you have a trouble, consistent one,
with abstraction.
All of us have a pretty good intuitive sense,
when someone is telling us a story,
is this meant to be literal reporting of events
in a sequential way, is this meant to be a parable,
is this meant to be a somewhat secondhand,
through the grapevine story.
We have a very good sense of how concrete
or how abstract the information that we're getting is.
Schizophrenics are terrible at that.
They have no intuition to get the right level of abstraction.
And schizophrenics always skew in the same direction,
which is to interpret things far more concretely
than is actually the case.
And that's the term that's used in the business, concreteness
of thought, which is having a lot of trouble doing the more
abstract process of seeing things
on a metaphorical level, things of that sort.
So here, here's the standard sort of test
you would give to someone if you think they're schizophrenic.
You give them an association task.
And you say something like, OK, can you
tell me what do these things have
in common, an apple, an orange, and a banana.
And they'll say all of them are multi-syllabic words.
You'll say, OK, well, that's great, that's true.
But anything else they have in common?
All of them have letters that involved closed loops, just
getting caught up in the most concrete possible level
of interpretations of it, not able to step back and do
any sort of abstracting.
You see this in all sorts of other ways.
Therapist role, meet the patient and say something like so
what's on your mind today, and they'll
say my hair in this very literal sort of way.
Or you'll say can I take your picture, holding a camera,
and they'll say, I don't have a picture to give you,
this very literal sense again.
Or things like you would sit down a schizophrenic
with a piece of paper and a pen and say, just
as part of what we're doing here,
can you write a sentence for me, any sentence.
And then you look at what they've
written which is a sentence for me, any sentence.
And then you say, no, no, no, actually, that's
not what I mean.
I mean can you come up with a sentence.
And when you've thought of that sentence, write it.
And they'll write the word it because they can't get out
of the concreteness of saying could you write a sentence, can
you write colon a sentence.
They're caught up in the concrete level of that.
A way that that always pops up, one
of the classic types of tests that's done,
is called proverb tests.
Proverbs, by definition, they are metaphorical.
They are parables, they are abstract.
And we all know intuitively that when
you're talking about birds of a feather flock together,
you're doing something symbolic about the well-known homogamy
of lips with people who they choose to marry
and the similarities.
Yes, birds of a feather flock together,
it's talking about like tend to assort with like.
Give proverbs to schizophrenics and they
can't get out of the most concrete level
of interpretation of it.
So you're sitting down and you say, OK, tell me
what this means.
A rolling stone gathers no moss.
And we all know that that's people are on the move,
don't make an emotional connections,
there is a detachment.
And they're often saying stones, stones rolling down hills,
it's very hard for plants to grow on them.
It's very hard because the surface tends to be smooth.
And then on top of it, if it's rolling,
you've got like this angular motion that move to it.
So it's very hard for moss to grow on stones.
In fact, I don't think I've ever seen that happen.
And I've seen many stones.
And on the most concrete possible level,
incapable of pulling it back to the level of abstraction.
Consistent, consistent feature of this.
Here, friend of mine who's a psychiatrist
came up with what has to be one of the all-time great proverb
tests for figuring out if someone
has the remotest tendency towards schizophrenic
concreteness.
There was a abstract phrase, a proverb,
that was very popular, that was very prevalent in the United
States during World War II.
It was up on posters and all the post offices, places like that.
And it was a way of abstractly telling people be careful
the information you put in letters that you are sending
off to loved ones who are off at war
because it may inadvertently wind up in the wrong hands
and could carry information that could be extremely damaging
to the war effort.
Do people know what it is?
Loose lips sink ships, loose lips sink ships,
wonderfully abstract notion.
Try sitting down a schizophrenic and saying
what does it mean when you say loose lips sink ships.
And, suddenly, there's this imagery
of ships being capsized by big lips coming out
of the water and things of that sort
because it can only be dealt with on the very
concrete level.
What else?
More symptomatology, delusions, belief in things that cannot
be, belief in having participated in historical
events that cannot be.
You're sitting there interviewing a schizophrenic
and they suddenly say have you heard
of the Great Wall of China.
And you will say, well, yes, in fact, I have.
And they'll say my idea, my idea.
The generals came to me at night with a map
and I said this is where it goes.
This is probably not what happened.
Delusional thought, inserting yourself,
conversations with people who no longer exist.
Related to that is the paranoia, which,
of course, is most florid in paranoid schizophrenia,
but it is a frequent theme.
What do apples, oranges, and bananas have in common?
They're all wired for sound.
If the fruit is listening to you,
this makes for a rather disquieting life.
And almost certainly, it has something
to do with if the world is making so little sense to you,
it is a world that is very threatening.
Along with that, most famously, perhaps,
with schizophrenia, is you get hallucinations.
Those are the defining features.
Somebody is trying to figure out if somebody in an emergency
room has come in with some sort of schizophrenic type disorder
and hear that the person is hearing voices
and that pretty much nails down the diagnosis.
For reasons that are very poorly understood,
the vast majority of hallucinations are auditory.
However, there's all sorts of notions with that.
And one great theory coming from our own Patrick House, given
two years ago, which is you get auditory hallucinations more
often than visual ones because we're
more accustomed to visual stuff in the world
having fragmented visions or seeing it across two mirrors,
reflections, things of that sort.
We are more vulnerable towards sounds not making sense.
Vast majority of hallucinations in schizophrenia
are auditory hallucinations.
When we see in a little while what the neurochemistry is
of hallucinations, by all logic, what they should be
is just random splatters of noise, and random visual dots,
and all of that.
Instead, they're structured.
They have content.
People hear voices, rather than random sound.
People see very structured hallucinations,
sufficiently so that researchers can even do studies
as to which are the most common voices heard by schizophrenics.
And, no surprise, in Western cultures,
forever and ever, the number one voice on the hit parade
is that of Jesus, the number two voice, Satan, the number three,
typically, whoever is the head of state
in the country at that point.
It's structure to that extent that you can publish papers
about what the hallucinations are like.
There's all sorts of structure underneath.
It is not just disordered thought,
it's loose associations, and tangenting,
and concreteness, and structured hallucinations.
What else?
Another feature of the schizophrenic symptoms
is social withdrawal.
And schizophrenia, everybody thinks
of as a disease of abnormal thought,
it is a disease of abnormal social affiliation.
You look at a-- you look at a schizophrenic
in some village in who knows where in the Amazon,
or in Bloomington, Indiana, and this is going to be someone who
is somewhat ostracized and socially disconnected, very
much alone.
It is not just the disease of disordered thought.
More and more people are realizing
the core with schizophrenia is the disordered thought.
The standard view has always been
to hone in on the most florid feature of the disease.
Schizophrenia is the disease where you hallucinate,
where you hear voices.
And the vast majority of the neuropharmacology research
that's been done out there on the disease
is meant to go and cure the hallucinations.
But far less responsive to any of the drugs
are the tangenting thought, the concreteness,
the loose associations.
More and more people are thinking
that that's really at the core of what the disease is about.
Couple more features of it, which
is the whole world of the social withdrawal.
Apathy, what we're beginning to see
is a dichotomy in the business, positive symptoms
in schizophrenia, paranoia, loose thoughts hallucination,
all of that.
Negative symptoms of schizophrenia,
the absence of social connectedness,
the absence of affect, a very flat expressive style.
Physiologically, you see some damping
of autonomic nervous systems in schizophrenics, so the positive
and the negative symptoms of the disease.
Last a couple of features of it, one is the notion
that, of course, schizophrenia has
something to do with violence.
Everybody knows that there is the scenario lurking out there
that occurs endless number of times which
is you have some psychiatrically unstable individual turning out
to have schizophrenia who winds up doing something
horribly violent, the danger of schizophrenics cracking
and going postal.
And every now and then, something like that happens.
20 years ago, there was a horrifying incident
at Berkeley.
A student there who was schizophrenic and probably
should not have been there at the point because he was not
well-medicated, something cracked and he
took a bunch of Berkeley students,
women, hostage in a bar at Berkeley,
did all sorts of horrific sexually abusive things there
before he killed himself after killing a few of them.
This is what happens when something like that
occurs with a schizophrenic.
Oh, my God, so we've got all these people
running around where that could be happening any second.
Schizophrenics are far less dangerous
than are normal individuals in society.
The rates of violence are extremely low,
with one exception, which is schizophrenics
being violent and damaging themselves.
Self-injury, a huge feature of schizophrenia,
part of the delusions, part of the thought disorder,
part of the despair, when every now and then your head
clears enough to see what the rest of it is like.
And there are even studies as to which
are the most popular places in the body that are mutilated
in schizophrenics.
Genitals are top on the list, and going down from there.
Horrific thing that happened, also about 20 years ago,
Columbia Medical School, and this
was an individual, a student there,
with a history of a lot of psychiatric instability,
and schizophrenia, and somewhat well-controlled with meds.
And somewhere in the third year when
starting the clinical rotations, the various stressors of it,
the person kind of unravelled.
Probably should not have been there in the first place,
but, nonetheless, had a schizophrenic break
and had withdrawn from med school and was sitting at home.
Part of his paranoia, part of his delusions
were that he was satanically possessed.
And, specifically, the way Satan was driving him to madness
was with obsessive sexual thoughts.
So being a relatively well-trained endocrinologist,
because we know better than him at this point how it works,
he decides how do I make those thoughts go away,
let me get rid of my testosterone.
So he castrated himself.
But at least being well-trained in one domain of endocrinology,
he knew that other fact we've had
in here which is that the adrenal glands also
make a certain degree of testosterone.
And he proceeded to try to adrenalectomize himself.
He sterilized with some alcohol.
He made an incision with anesthetic.
He had a mirror there, angled to be
able to see what he was doing.
And at one point, he hit a blood vessel, which started bleeding.
And he went to the ER at Columbia Presbyterian,
going in there, not saying to his former classmates,
oh, my God, guys, can you help me, look what I've done.
Saying instead, hi, guys, I'm trying to take out my adrenals
and I'm having a problem here with it,
can you give me a hand.
This is very disordered thought.
This is a very elegant version of it
schizophrenic self-injury, schizophrenic suicide,
is anything but clean.
Number one on the list, genitals, number two
for women, female schizophrenics, breasts, number
three, thighs, on it goes.
This brings up another feature of the disease, which
is, back in the 1960s, when all sorts of laudable things
happened along certain cultural lines,
there amid that was one horrifically
damaging idiotic thing that emerged
in psychiatry at the time, which was a minority
view in psychiatry, a lunatic fringe view,
that, basically, schizophrenia is not so bad.
Schizophrenia has all sorts of hidden blessings.
And soon, it had frameworks of things
like schizophrenia is the disease of being
healthy in a crazy world.
Schizophrenia is the disease of having insights into life that
other people can't.
And psychiatrists at the time, one of them,
a man named Ronald Laing, who became famous
for this, for arguing it's not a disease,
we shouldn't be medicating, we shouldn't be hospitalizing,
it's a bunch of blessings.
And it is even continued to this day.
The quote that I put on the top of the handout, Andrew
Wild, who is one of the gurus of sort of complementary medicine,
and you'll see an absolutely ridiculous statement
there along the lines of the hidden blessings
of schizophrenia.
There were movies at that time, King of Hearts
was one, very popular one about somebody having
to hide from the police or who knows what, and the asylum,
and eventually releasing the schizophrenics who
were so much saner than the other people around,
and heartwarming.
And all you need to do is be schizophrenic or know someone
who is or have a family member and you will see
there are no hidden blessings.
This is not a disease of hidden compensations
and more insight into the world.
This is one of the most horrific ways that biology can go wrong.
And one of the best demonstrations of it
is half of schizophrenics attempt suicide.
And the more often you have periods of remission,
the more likely you are to commit suicide.
What's the significance of that?
The more often you have periods where
you're clear-headed enough to see what your life is
like the rest of the time, the more likely
you are to try to kill yourself.
A disease with no hidden blessings whatsoever.
Other features of it, there's an aging component,
two different forms.
First one is as schizophrenics become older, elderly,
what you see is the positive symptoms tend to disappear.
The hallucinations get damp, the delusions,
the loose associations, and the negative symptomatology
is what comes to the forefront, this world of just flat affect
and withdrawal.
The other age feature of it we will hear about it
in a bit, which is real defining, which
is schizophrenia is a disease where,
in the vast majority of the sufferers,
it has late adolescence, early adulthood onset.
It is a disease of 18 year olds who
come down with a diagnosis for the first time.
If you make it to age 30 without schizophrenia,
you have virtually no chance of ever having it.
It is a disease of adolescent onset.
And this is going to fit with two
things we'll be talking about.
One is the epidemiological evidence
showing that what schizophrenic attacks-- what
schizophrenic breaks typically are at the very beginning
are in response to major stressors.
These are individuals who have always
been a little bit odd, who, in elementary school,
had imaginary playmates far later than most other kids did,
who had all sorts of periods where they seemed
not to be paying attention and lost in their own thoughts, who
had trouble making friends, but they were OK.
They were sort of hanging on.
And then it was late in high school
when they had the car accident, or the first boyfriend was
so horrible to them, or the parent died,
or whatever the crisis was, and this person who was just
sort of holding on, that's where the dip occurs,
and that's where it crashes.
Schizophrenia as an adolescent onset disease
where stress plays a major precipitating role.
The other piece that we'll see is the fact
that schizophrenia almost certainly is heavily
anchored in the frontal cortex.
Frontal cortex, you remember the frontal cortex.
Frontal cortex, which is not fully mature
until age 25 or so, the last big burst of frontal maturation,
late adolescence or early adulthood,
we'll see there's lots of reasons
to think that schizophrenia is a disease where,
around late adolescence, a fragile, vulnerable
frontal cortex gets kicked once too hard with something
or other.
And that's one where the problems emerge.
A couple of other features, demography
in every culture ever looked at on Earth, 1% to 2%
of the population comes down with it,
no gender differences, no social economic status
differences in terms of who becomes a friend.
But once you are, there is the not very surprising
downward socioeconomic spiral, which
is, no surprise, people who are schizophrenic
do not make very good CEOs of large corporations.
These are the street people.
These are the homeless.
The majority of people living on streets in this country
are individuals who are schizophrenic, not alcoholic.
That is the far more common thing that you see.
So a disease of complete collapse into some of the least
cared for sort of strata of society, that is part
of the demographics as well.
So that's what the disease looks like.
And if you're really thinking about these symptoms,
at this point, you should be jumping out
of your chair because of something
really disturbing about this collection of symptoms.
So what is schizophrenia?
It's a disease of thinking abnormally.
This is a disease of thinking differently from everyone else.
This is a disease of thinking, in a way, that everyone
else thinks isn't right.
And, suddenly, we are skating on thin ice of this transitioning
from a world of neuropsychiatric disorders and medicine
into a world of all sorts of hidden agendas of abuse.
And psychiatry has been hand in hand
in bed with all sorts of ideologues over the decades,
over the years, and willing to hand out diagnoses
of schizophrenia to political dissidents,
to people you want to get rid of.
And this is a totally loaded, loaded diagnosis,
when, most fundamentally, this is
a disease of everybody else thinks
you're not thinking normally.
Because, some of the time, that describes
a florid psychiatric disease that destroys your life.
And some of the time, it describes people
who are just a pain in the ass.
And some of the time, it describes
people who are going to transform the world by thinking
differently.
How can you possibly approach this disease
in an objective way rather than it having just
shot through with ideology?
And one of the ways in which this can happen,
one of the ways where you get some grounding in it
is to look at what the disease appears like in other cultures,
because you begin to see the commonalities.
And this begins to impress you with the notion
that there is, in fact, a core set of dysfunctions
to the disease.
So let me tell you about the one case
of cross-cultural schizophrenia I have ever been exposed to.
And I was going to bring slides, but I couldn't quite
figure out how to scan them.
So maybe eight years from now, I'll
get together for that technology.
But it has to do with the time I spent in Africa and my nearest
neighbors.
Nearest neighbors there are from a tribe called the Maasai.
These are nomadic pastoralists.
And these are not the folks next door.
This is as different of a culture
as you could find on this planet.
Men, around puberty, boys around puberty
become warriors, spend the next 10 years in their warrior
clans, as we've heard about, pillaging the neighbors,
getting killed in return around age 25.
As elders, they settle down and marry their first wife,
typically a 13 year old.
And, well, as soon as they can, add on more.
This is a culture with, up until recently,
a life expectancy in the 30s.
This is a culture where people believe in all sorts of things
that we would view as being paranormal.
This is a culture in which people celebrate events
by drinking tureens of cow blood.
This is a very different bunch of folks.
Let me tell you about the one schizophrenic
Maasai who I've ever seen.
And this was about 25 years ago.
And I was in my camp, which was a few miles away from this one
village where I knew a lot of folks,
and just sitting there minding my own business.
And I had this one woman in there
who was my-- closest friend or whatever in the village.
And I suddenly see she is running up
the mountain with a bunch of the other women
from the village in this completely agitated state.
They come roaring into my camp, totally flummoxed and just
like completely agitated.
These are people who do not get agitated over things very
readily.
These are people who, as a puberty right,
have to go out and kill a lion or don't come back.
So when Maasai are getting all crazed about something,
this is something worth paying attention to.
They're totally crazed and they're saying somebody
in the village has done something very wrong
and I need to come and help them.
It turns out what they wanted me to do was bring my car.
That's the way in which I was going to be helpful.
So they impressed me into doing this.
And we all pile into the car and started
driving down and heading towards the village.
And as we're getting there, I'm beginning
to get some information.
And what I see is them telling me
about a woman in the village who's
done something wildly inappropriate
and they've had it with her.
Now, I had been around that area for about four years,
at that point, knew most of the people in that village.
And this was someone who I had never encountered.
A-ha, socially isolated, living in the back of some hut
at the far corner of the village, a first sort of hint.
So they're describing to me that she has
done something inappropriate.
She has killed a goat.
You don't do that.
You don't do that if you are a woman.
You don't do that if it is not a ceremony.
You don't do it the way she has done it.
She has grabbed somebody's goat and ripped
its throat open with her teeth and was now there with a goat.
And everybody had had it with her.
So we're driving there and I'm listening to this,
and I'm saying, whoa, this sounds like a psychotic break.
This is going to be cool.
This is going to be really interesting.
I wonder what it'll be like to talk to the family
and find out what the symptoms have been.
Or I wonder if she's going to have any insight.
It's going to be fascinating to talk to her about this.
So I get into the village, and this person
I was now planning to have some good heart to hearts with about
their tangential thinking, out comes this huge naked woman
with a goat in her mouth by the throat, covered in goat blood,
and goat urine, and goat shit.
And this woman gives this howling yell, charges
across the village, knocks me over, and attempts
to strangle me.
I'm a normal kind of guy, normal fantasy life.
Never once in the darkest recesses of my mind
did this strike me as something that was appealing.
I'm lying there, she's throttling me.
I'm thinking this is how I'm going to wind up dying.
My poor parents are going to have
to deal with the stigma of this for the rest of their lives,
that this is-- he's done in by someone
with a goat in her mouth, and thinking that.
So, fortunately, everybody else was much more clear-headed
and they pull her off me.
And what they proceed to do is push her into my Jeep.
And they pile on top of her and they say let's go.
So I collect myself and leap in and we head off driving there.
And this woman was floridly out of control of there.
But we're driving somewhere.
Where are we driving?
We're driving to the nearest government clinic, which
was about 25 miles away and consisted
of a wood shack and a nurse there,
a government nurse, who as a result of this three
weeks of training, gave out malarial medication
for anything you came to complain about.
And what they were going to do was
they wanted to get rid of her.
So we go driving and we eventually get to this clinic.
Well, what they proceed to do is push her into the hut
and hammer the door closed.
So I'm sitting there, at this point,
saying, OK, well, we've containment.
So what do we now?
Do we-- do we talk to her?
Does the nurse talk to-- do we go and get the family?
What are you-- so I turned to my friends
there and say so what do we do now.
And they say let's get the hell out of here,
showing an important thing.
Even in a culture as different from ours,
nobody has a whole lot of tolerance for the mentally ill.
Let's get out of here.
So they persuade me to go.
We get into the vehicle and start the long drive back.
After a while, the car's aired out a bit
and everybody's calming down a bit.
And I decide this was wonderful.
What a marvelous opportunity to learn
about some cross-cultural psychiatry or whatever.
So I turned to my friend who's sitting next to me there
and I say so what do you think was wrong with that woman.
And she looks at me as I'm an idiot.
She says she's crazy.
And I said, well, how do you know.
How do you know?
And she said she hears voices.
And I say, ha, you guys hear voices.
Maasai hear voices, they do trance dancing
before they do sort of these around the clock cattle runs.
They hear voices of ghosts, that sort of thing.
I say to her what's the big deal, you hear voices.
And she says, no, no, no, it's different.
Then I say, well, what else was she doing wrong.
And she says she killed a goat.
And I say you guys kill goats.
But, again, this wasn't how it's done.
There is an old longstanding belief among Maasai men
that it is very bad luck to have women observe eating meat,
so they get to go off on their own and eat all the goat meat.
And it's done in a certain ritualized way.
You do not kill a goat if you are a woman,
if you are a naked, yelling banshee
of a woman in the middle of the village with your bare hands
and teeth.
You don't do this.
So I'm sitting there and I'm saying, well,
do you know this-- it's kind of hard for me
to tell the difference here.
And she says, in the sense, idiot,
she hears voices at the wrong time.
And that's the core, ultimately, of the objectivity
that's needed in this disease.
In order to understand what counts as abnormal thought,
you first have the huge challenge
of understanding all the different ways
that normal thought can manifest itself.
And that is a classic problem in training psychiatrists sitting
in some inner city clinic recognizing
that the amount of cultural variety there,
or the different ways in which you can be normal,
is extraordinary and extraordinarily challenging
at times.
You are on very thin ice deciding
you know what counts as abnormal thinking
before you have a very wide sense
of what can count as normal.
So now let's take a five minute break.
And all sorts of very accomplished artists
over the years who've turned out to be schizophrenic.
And schizophrenia is not what made their creativity possible,
schizophrenia is what destroyed their careers.
Other question is so what happened to that woman.
And this was shortly before I was coming back to the states.
And it was about nine months later that I went back there.
And some point, when seeing my friend,
saying whatever happened to that woman.
And her response was, oh, she died.
Maasai do not like to stay indoors, she died.
That's all I ever found out, once again,
as different to the culture on Earth as you can imagine.
And they are no more tolerant of the mentally ill than we are.
So now, beginning the neurochemistry of it,
what's going on in the brain, what's
going on with brain chemistry?
And for decades and decades, there
has been one dominant model for schizophrenia, which
is the dopamine hypothesis, the notion that somewhere
in the brain, stay tuned, there is
an excess of dopamine winding up in the synapses.
What's the evidence for it?
First off, you do things like look
at levels of dopamine breakdown products in the bloodstream,
in the urine, in the cerebral spinal fluid,
tending to be elevated in schizophrenics.
Next, what you see is the most important fact
which is all of the classic drugs that
work with schizophrenia block dopamine receptors.
Anti-psychotic drugs, neuroleptics,
Haldol, Thorazine, when, at some exciting moment
in the made for TV movie, where the person has gone mad
in the ER and someone yells for a syringe,
they're yelling for a syringe of something that will
block the dopamine receptors.
If you give schizophrenics dopamine or some drug that
activates dopamine receptors, their symptoms
get worse, which kind of makes you wonder who
approved that kind of study.
That doesn't sound very logical.
You look post-mortem at the brains of schizophrenics
and there's elevated levels of dopamine receptors
in the frontal cortex.
So we have a whole bunch of ways that things can go wrong.
We can have too much dopamine coming out,
for some reason or other.
We can have too many dopamine receptors,
enhanced sensitivity.
We know another possible way, which is dopamine
is then broken down by this is enzyme.
And if this enzyme isn't working very well,
levels are going to accumulate.
And there's a bit of evidence of abnormalities
of this enzyme in some individuals.
So one additional interesting piece
of evidence for this dopamine hypothesis,
which seemed absolutely clear by now,
you have somebody who's schizophrenic,
you give them a drug that blocks dopamine receptors
and thus decreases the dopaminergic signaling,
and they start getting better.
What's your hypothesis have to be?
I bet you they had too much dopamine.
This is shown in another interesting way.
18 counties over in the brain from where
dopamine's got something to do with this,
dopamine serves another role.
In a motor system related to the basal ganglia, all
of that, involved in fine motor control, a part of the brain
called the substantia nigra.
And if you get a little bit of damage there,
I think I mentioned a couple extras ago,
you get the tremor of old age.
If you get a lot of damage there,
you got yourself Parkinson's disease.
And what occurs in Parkinson's is
90% of the neurons in the substantia nigra die.
And people are even beginning to understand why.
These are dopaminergic neurons.
Parkinson's is a disease of losing all the dopamine
signaling in this part of the brain.
People began to figure this out in the early '60s.
And out of that came one of the first drug treatments
for any neurological disease.
What's the strategy?
These are people who have too little
dopamine in this part of the brain.
Give them replacement dopamine.
Turns out it's hard to get dopamine in the brain,
so you would give people one step earlier
in the biosynthesis a drug called L-DOPA.
L-DOPA, which then gets converted into dopamine,
and this was miraculous.
All sorts of people who were just
paralysed with their Parkinson's, L-DOPE
suddenly liberated them.
There's a movie 15 years ago or so,
called Awakenings with Robin Williams,
which was based on a book by Oliver Sacks,
based on his own work, which had to do
with this rare disease that emerged after World War I,
having something to do with the influenza pandemic, then
a post-encephalitic paralysis, which became
known as stiff man syndrome.
And people who were essentially frozen in place,
and what we now know is it's an autoimmune disorder that
targets something with the dopamine system.
Sacks was a medical resident at the time, was-- at that point,
the L-DOPA stuff was just coming out with Parkinson's.
And Sacks was the one who had the insight
to say I bet the stiff man syndrome is
a case of the most extreme severe Parkinson's that you
could possibly get.
And, thus, he was the first one to try L-DOPA on people
with the syndrome, and thus you had miraculous awakenings,
people moving voluntarily for the first time in decades,
totally amazing.
But then, you have a downside.
And the downside that we know sort
of the structure of by now, you've
got a problem with dopamine in the substantia nigra,
lower than normal levels.
Everywhere else in the brain, you've got normal levels.
So you're trying to fix up this depletion,
you give the person L-DOPA.
But you're not spritzing it into their substantia nigra,
you're putting it in their stomach or their bloodstream.
You are raising dopamine levels in the substantia nigra
and things get better, but you're also raising it
everywhere else in the brain.
And what you wind up seeing is if you give a Parkinsonian
patient too much L-DOPA, they become psychotic.
They are indistinguishable from a schizophrenic.
And what was shown in the movie was this character
played by Robert De Niro wound up
having this florid paranoid psychosis from the L-DOPA,
so, oh, that being more evidence,
you give a drug that raises dopamine levels
throughout the brain and somebody
starts acting schizophrenic.
You give somebody a drug that causes very rapid dumping
of dopamine, and they will transiently
appear schizophrenic.
What's the drug?
That's what amphetamines do.
And you get somebody coming to an ER who is loose associations
and hallucinating delusions and all of that,
and most clinicians cannot tell whether this was somebody with
an amphetamine psychosis or schizophrenia.
Pump their stomach out.
If they suddenly start making more sense,
it was probably the amphetamines.
So this being more evidence.
Now, you should be thinking what about the flip side.
So you have schizophrenics, where you give them
these neuroleptic drugs to block dopamine receptors
in the frontal cortex, as it turns out.
But you're not injecting it straight in there,
you're putting in the guts.
And, now, you've got too much dopamine here.
You lower its levels, but everywhere else it
gets a little lower than normal-- not dopamine levels,
but dopamine signaling.
And, suddenly, you should generate this prediction
that if you over medicate schizophrenics,
they should start looking as if they have Parkinson's disease.
And that's exactly what you see as well,
a disorder called tardive dyskinesia, kinetics,
body movement dyskinesia, abnormal one.
And these are individuals who look Parkinsonian.
Go into a state hospital, go into the back ward,
and find somebody sitting there who
is tremoring like this all over their body the entire time.
And that's somebody who was going
to have been taking these drugs for 20, 25 years or so.
So, collectively, this winds up telling you
all these different ways of suggesting the problem
is that there is too much dopamine in this disease.
However, just to make life miserable,
there is at least one anti-schizophrenic drug
out there which what it does is it increases dopamine signaling
and people get better.
Bummer, nobody knows what to make of this at this point.
So what's the excess dopamine doing in there?
It's not having anything to do with movement stuff.
That's substantia nigra.
It's not having anything to do with pleasure.
That's dopamine in different parts of the brain.
The best evidence is this is dopamine
functioning in the frontal cortex,
stimulating normal executive function.
And what you've got is a frontal cortex
that is not making a whole lot of sense.
Loose associations, that seems to be
where the dopamine problem is played out.
Next neurotransmitter that's been implicated,
serotonin, look at the chemical structure of serotonin,
and then look at the chemical structure of all
of the major hallucinogens, LSD, mescaline, psilocybin,
they are all structurally almost identical.
And all of those hallucinogens fit into serotonin receptors
and activate them.
What is a hallucination induced by a drug?
You've got some serotonin synapse
where nothing's happening.
The pre-synaptic neuron hasn't had
anything interesting to say in weeks,
it hasn't released any serotonin.
But, now, there's something that kind of looks like serotonin
percolating its way into the synapse, where it could then
bind to the serotonin receptors.
And as far as this neuron thinks,
it just got a message from there.
And it didn't come from there.
This neuron is hearing voices.
And the fact that that's how the hallucinogens work immediately
generated all sorts of hypotheses
that there are abnormalities in serotonin in schizophrenia
as well having something to do with the hallucinations.
Next, the neurotransmitter glutamate
has also been implicated.
What's the evidence there?
When you take a drug that wildly stimulates
one subtype of glutamate receptor,
you begin to look a bit like a schizophrenic.
What's the drug?
PCP, angel dust, phencyclidine.
That stimulates a subtype of glutamate receptors.
And a lot of people have argued this
has enough resemblance to what schizophrenia looks like
that there has to be a glutamate problem going on
in the disease.
Very, very little bits of evidence
for that, the one thing that has been shown in rats
is when you stimulate the brain with PCP,
what you get is an increased levels of receptors
for serotonin in some interesting parts of the brain,
some kind of connection running around there.
So very, very solid implication of dopamine, some serotonin
thrown in there, glutamate, eleventy other
neurotransmitters that people are thinking about,
but these are the main ones.
And, overwhelmingly, the dominant hypothesis
remains the dopamine hypothesis.
What about brain metabolism?
What's going on in the brain, for example,
during a hallucination?
And what you essentially get is wild activation
of everywhere in the brain and you are hallucinating.
You get wild activation, people who are in imaging studies
have taken these drugs voluntarily,
you get wild activation in the cortex,
except for, say, the first couple
layers of the visual cortex, or the first couple of layers
of the auditory cortex.
What's that about?
The cortex is seeing things and hearing things
that did not come in from the outside world, that
never stimulated the primary sensory cortex.
Otherwise, during hallucinations,
you see extremely high levels of metabolism
throughout the brain.
The next interesting thing in that realm,
you give schizophrenics some standard declarative
memory tasks and metabolism in the hippocampus
does not increase as much as in other individuals.
So that brings us to structural features of the disease.
Yeah?
Does the brain-- while hallucinating,
does the brain work somewhat like when dreaming?
Good question.
Does the brain, in terms of patterns of activation,
look somewhat like during dreaming?
Yeah.
It's not the primary sensory cortex regions that activate.
Frontal cortex is relatively quiet.
And the rest of the brain is going like mad,
and certainly makes sense.
So structural stuff, there's all sorts
of structural abnormalities in the brains of schizophrenics.
How do you learn this though?
Very difficult, because, for the first couple of decades
in the field, it was all post-mortem analysis, which
is you take out the brain of a schizophrenic
and you go and look at it, and you
see if there's anything weird.
So what's the problems with that?
All sorts of things, which is to try
to do post-mortem studies on human brains, different brain
sit for different lengths of time
before they're autopsied and removed.
So that's a huge piece of variability.
Moreover, you can get post-mortem artifacts,
which is to say you're pulling out
the brain and somebody squeezes it too hard
and squishes something in here and it's not
going to look normal afterward, reflecting the handling of it.
And out of that has come this whole world
of neuropsychiatry types were what they
live for are rapid autopsies.
And a whole bunch of medical centers
have rapid autopsy teams connected
with their Alzheimer's folk, connected
with some of the psychiatric diseases,
where their idea is to get in there as fast
as possible with patients who have
or whose family have given permission for that
and get the brain out as fast as you can.
And I remember, a few years ago, I
was down to Duke Medical Center, and they
had one of these rapid autopsy SWAT teams.
And they were bragging about how they were getting brains out
in under 30 minutes from death.
So that solves a whole lot of the post-mortem rotting
away lag time.
So all of those wind up being problems.
More confounds, very often you're
trying to understand the brains of schizophrenics who have died
who are older, who are elderly.
And the confound there is schizophrenics
have horrible diets.
You are seeing perhaps the brain consequences
of malnutrition all those years, rather than seeing
the consequences of the disease itself.
Another problem that you've got is you get someone
who's schizophrenic, and, almost certainly,
what they have been doing for a long time is taking
drugs for their schizophrenia.
And if you see something different in the brain,
maybe it's due to the schizophrenia
or maybe it's due to the effect of the drugs.
And what that has generated is the other thing
that people in this business kill for, which
is unmedicated schizophrenics.
And researchers love these people,
they can't get enough of them.
This is the teenager who is brought
in for the first diagnosis.
And the family is no doubt thinking finally we're
going to get some help.
And all the researcher physician there is thinking
is they want to centrifuge this kid
and do research and find that out,
getting unmedicated schizophrenics.
Finally, a big boon in the field has been brain imaging.
So instead of trying to figure out the normal size of things
after you've taken the brain out,
you could image the brain in situ,
while the person is still alive.
So given all of those methodological constraints,
there's a number of things that have come up.
Here's a cross-section of the brain,
although I'm realizing this is a cross-section of a rat brain.
And it also is a amusing face.
And what you have are these things
that run through the brain called the ventricles.
They are these caverns running through, filled
with cerebral spinal fluid.
What you see in schizophrenia is enlargement of the ventricles.
So the ventricles enlarge.
The skull isn't going anywhere, and, thus,
if the ventricles are getting bigger,
something else has to be getting smaller.
There is contraction compression of the cortex.
So you get cortical compression in schizophrenics.
You get it particularly so in the frontal cortex.
A-ha, that's kind of interesting.
Meanwhile, over in the hippocampus, what you have,
normally, are these very characteristic cell fields,
where-- I just drew them wrong, where
neurons that are called pyramidal neurons that,
shockingly, are pyramidally shaped.
And what they have is they're organized in layers.
And they send all of their projections
off to the next cell layer that happens to be diamond shaped.
And that's how it works.
You look in the brains of schizophrenics post-mortem
and there's fewer hippocampal neurons.
And there's some of them are facing the wrong way.
They've been flipped over.
They're sending projections where they're not supposed to.
This is not going to make for a whole lot of solid sequential
thought if you've got neurons pointing
in the wrong direction.
So that's popped up in the literature.
Then, of course, frontal cortex, where
what's been seen as, in some studies, fewer neurons,
in some studies, fewer glia, in some studies,
fewer of both, what you see is, also, lower levels of a protein
called reelin.
And what reelin has to do is with cortical maturation.
There's lower levels of it in the frontal cortex
of schizophrenics.
All of this begins to fit in this picture of you're
not getting a normal final burst of frontal maturation
late adolescence, early adulthood.
You're seeing a lot of problems there.
What else?
You also see a couple of other minor things.
The thalamus tends to be atrophied.
Nobody really knows what's going on.
The sense is hippocampus pointing
in the wrong direction, frontal cortex, that's
getting compressed, because it's got fewer neurons perhaps.
This is not going to make for a normal brain.
So now switching one box back, what about the genetics?
And you'll notice this is one of our first topics
where there's nothing been happening here
in terms of endocrine effects, acute releasers not terribly
pertinent to this field.
So what about genetics?
Going back to all of our classic behavior genetics approaches,
this has been the psychiatric disease
where there was the first evidence
for a genetic component to it.
The twin studies, the Kety adoption studies
that we've heard all about, and what they have suggested
was about 50% heritability for schizophrenia.
And you are all over now what heritability means
and what it doesn't mean.
What you see within families is if you have an individual who
has schizophrenia and they have an identical twin,
the twin has a 50% chance of the disease.
If they have a full sibling, about 25%
chance of a disease, half sibling, about 12%.
Take a random person off the street, 1% to 2%,
so there is a large genetic load.
What you also see is in a higher than expected number
of close relatives of schizophrenics
are mild versions of thought disorder.
And that's going to come in on Friday
in a very interesting way.
What this is saying right off the bat,
it is not saying that all relatives of schizophrenics
have these abnormalities, but they are occurring
at a higher than expected rate.
So that's old classical behavior genetics.
Now, jumping forward a decade's worth of technology,
how about molecular approaches the version of just getting
genetic markers?
Not identifying the gene itself, but you remember this approach
by now where you are finding a stretch of DNA.
And inside that stretch is a gene
that is very pertinent to whatever it is,
and the folks with the disease have a different version
than the other folks.
But you don't know what the gene is or where it is.
So using this marker technique, some of the first disease gene
markers came out in the mid '80s, late '80s,
for schizophrenia.
And these were landmark studies.
And everybody was incredibly excited about them.
And these were really, really important.
And there was a problem, which is somebody
would isolate a marker for schizophrenia
in an Amish population.
People love studying the Amish for things like this
because they've got big families,
because they don't have a whole lot of substance abuse,
because they have very healthy lifestyles,
and, most importantly, because men, Amish men who
say they are the father of somebody or other
are probably the father of the somebody or other.
There's not a lot of messing around going on.
And that's kind of helpful.
You're trying to understand genetics.
And if you don't even have the right person pegged
as the father, that's going to make for some messy data.
People love the Amish, people love inbred Icelandic fishing
villages.
These are all the folks who get studied.
And in those years, out came some
of the first genetic markers.
And the problem was each of the studies
was getting a different marker.
And nobody was coming up with any replication,
a complete uninformative mess that
was a major disappointment in the field.
So very little happened in terms of the genetic marker approach.
So we had to wait another decade or two, and, now,
our current more modern version, which
is forget a genetic marker, what about actual genes?
Are there are genes that have been implicated
in schizophrenia where there are abnormalities,
where there are variances?
And then it comes from two different flavors,
eight different flavors, our usual deal.
We've already heard about one of these,
which is variance in versions of this gene
coding for this enzyme that degrades dopamine carries
an association with schizophrenia.
Nonetheless, very small effects.
Interesting finding, and this was the last year,
these were three papers back-to-back in science,
from three different groups, all of whom
used a very contemporary technique
for looking for genes, which is a snip analysis.
And it's really interesting, and not in a million years
could I describe it clearly.
But using this very state of the art thing,
they all had huge populations of schizophrenics,
thousands of people in the study, great studies.
And the amazing thing is they all
found genetic abnormalities, and they all found one in common
with a huge effect, which was very, very reassuring,
until you looked at that the gene, which
made no sense at all.
All three of these groups, superb scientists,
reported that, in schizophrenia, you
have a higher than expected rate of abnormalities
in genes of the major histocompatibility complex.
What is that about?
The human equivalent, wait, we're
back at pheromones, and individual signatures,
and the immune system.
What is this about?
Nobody has a clue.
But a remarkable consistency in these three studies,
they all found abnormalities in these major histocompatibility
genes that have to do with cell signatures and immune defenses,
all of that.
And these were big effects in all three studies.
All the studies were done superbly.
People are just beginning to digest that one.
Nobody really has a very clear idea.
Some other genes have popped up as having mutations
or a lot of variants, where one particular variant is more
associated with schizophrenia.
And there's this one gene that's been found and replicated
called DISC1.
So does DISC1 do?
Nobody has a clue.
And just showing how pathetic this whole finding is,
what does DISC, D-I-S-C, stand for?
Disrupted in schizophrenia 1.
That sure tells you a lot about what's going on.
Well, what happens in schizophrenia?
You have abnormalities in genes that
are abnormal in schizophrenia.
Let's party.
So you got DISC1, and people trying to figure out it's
got something to do with second messengers.
Nobody really knows.
There's not a whole lot that has been
happening in this field that counts as progress,
really frustrating.
People still need to make sense of this finding.
One area, though, that's getting a lot of traction
in the last few years goes back to one of our weird mutations
from our macroevolution type lectures,
that business of different numbers of copies
of a gene, macro mutations on that level,
transposable events, gene duplications, a term we
got back then is copy number variants.
How many copies of particular genes?
And the one thing that seems to be
consistent is all sorts of genes in schizophrenia
are popping up with abnormal numbers of copies of the gene
rather than abnormalities in the gene itself.
So that's really exciting.
What's unexciting is nobody's replicating
which the duplications are.
And most of the genes, nobody has a clue what they do.
People are flailing other than seeing
there's all sorts of different genetic abnormalities
that are popping up.
How can that be?
How could they all be relevant to this disease?
Back one hour, it's not a disease.
It's a whole bunch of heterogeneous ones,
and there's going to be all sorts
of different genetic components to it.
Now our next box, early experience,
and what early experience immediately translates into
is parenting style.
What does schizophrenia have to do with parenting style?
We will see shortly, which is my smooth way
of trying to say that I just jumped a paragraph by accident.
So, of course, of course, where we
begin is looking at the role of early stress
in life, because that's obviously
where you have to begin discussing early experience
in schizophrenia.
It's that whole stress model thing.
We already heard one version of it, the adolescent stressor,
takes the kid who's just barely holding on and dips him
way down.
Another version of it that should seem plenty
logical to us by now, prenatal stress.
People who were fetuses during the Dutch Hunger Winter
have a higher than expected rate of schizophrenia.
People who were fetuses during a huge famine
in China, 1959 to 1961, higher incidence of schizophrenia.
Rats, expose them prenatally to lots of glucocorticoids,
and they wind up having elevated dopamine levels
in their frontal cortex.
Have mechanical trauma at birth, birth trauma, brief hypoxia,
any of those things, increased incidence of schizophrenia.
This is very interesting.
Back to our business, remember, identical twins,
they can either share one single placenta
or have two of them, monochorionic or bichorionic.
Monochorionic twins are more likely to share
the trait of schizophrenia than bichorionic identical twins.
Fetal environment, stuff's going on there.
What else with that?
You wind up seeing a lot of suggestions of interactions
between the neurochemistry of stress,
and some of the abnormalities here.
You know how this works.
Somewhere lurking out there is a data set
that's going to wind up looking like this,
bad version of the gene, good version of the gene,
more and more stressful of the developmental environment.
It hasn't been identified yet, but it's
got to be something like that because everything's like that.
So leading us now obviously to discussing parenting style
and schizophrenia.
So where does that come in?
Take the best psychiatrists in the field, the titans,
the grand poobahs in 1950, and they
would know the exact answer, which
is parenting style is the cause of schizophrenia.
Abnormal parenting is the cause of schizophrenia.
And out of this, of course, since in those days,
fathers did no parenting, what you were saying is abnormal
mothering is the cause of schizophrenia.
And the great term that was used there
was schizophrenogenic mothering, mothering style
that generates schizophrenia.
What was schizophrenogenic mothering about?
Well, it depends on whose paper you're reading.
But, in general, what they tended
to have were elements of conflicting emotional messages,
conflicting, a double bind is the phrase
that always ran through it.
The mother gets their son two ties for his birthday,
he puts one of them on.
She says what's the matter, you don't like the other tie
I got you, or, at the more fundamental level,
saying you never say you love me, you never say you love me,
you never say-- I love you.
How can that mean anything to me when I just
forced you to say that?
There's no winning.
And, in that view, what schizophrenia
was about was raising a kid with distorted, contradictory,
fragmented emotional demands from the schizophrenogenic
mother and out comes schizophrenia.
Now, actually, by the early '50s, people in the field
were feeling far more broad in their thinking,
recognizing this might be damaging,
in fact, to women who were the mothers of schizophrenics.
And a much more humane model came in,
which was recognizing the possibility that fathers could
screw kids up in the same way.
What was more broadly called this double bind
theory of schizophrenia, it is caused by parenting.
It is caused by particular parenting style.
And then, in the early '50s, along came the very first drug
for schizophrenia, the neuroleptics,
the dopamine receptor blockers.
And over the course of the next few years,
90% of the hospital beds in this country
for psychiatric patients were emptied out,
the first medication that effectively
treated schizophrenia.
And at that point, if one had any sort of capacity
to face reality, all of the proponents
of schizophrenogenic mothering should
have been shocked and stopped in their feet
at that point, saying, my God, what have we done.
It's a biochemical disorder.
It is not a disorder of mothers who are not competent mothers.
And it is fascinating to read in the leading psychiatry
journals from that time, you would get these editorials
from grand old men in the field, where
they would be saying I have spent my whole life researching
this disease, I have spent my life
trying to fight this disease, which is hell, which tragically
destroys lives.
I've been trying to do the right thing.
I have been trying to help people.
Look, what I have done instead.
This realization that ran through the community
that parenting style has nothing to do with it.
And it's half a century's worth of mothers
bringing in their late adolescents
for the first diagnosis and being told, unfortunately,
it's this nightmare of a disease.
How could this have happened?
Where does it come from?
You caused it.
You caused it with your mothering style.
Endlessly, during the period where modern biochemistry
sweeps into psychiatry, over and over,
there are cases like this, where the whole field has
to stop and say, my God, what have
we done telling people they caused it
through some parenting style, something of that sort.
It's a biochemical disorder.
So this was a shocking finding at the time
and transformed the field in terms
of schizophrenogenic mothering going down
the sink at that point.
Nonetheless, there is an interesting literature
showing abnormalities or oddities
in the way communication works in the families
of schizophrenics.
And this is a field now that's called communication deviance.
What you see is, on the average, among first order relatives
of schizophrenics, parents, siblings, immediate family,
what you see is, on the average, an odd communicative style.
You see a very fragmented communicating,
a very telescoped terse, broken phrase sort of style.
This has been noted very often.
Again, this is not what is seen in every close relative
of a schizophrenic, but higher than an expected rate.
What you also see is all sorts of realms of, in a sense,
private communication between schizophrenics
and their close families.
And the way this is shown is with things
like-- this was a classic version.
You take schizophrenics and you show them
a bunch of-- no, that's not what you do.
You give them a Rorschach print, one
of those ink symmetrical things that's just
completely chaotic looking.
And they look at it for a while, and then
you put it into a stack of a dozen other ones,
and you mix them up.
And you give them to the parents of the individual.
And the schizophrenic or the healthy control
is now trying to describe to the parents which one they
saw, how to find the correct one in there.
Control healthy individuals sitting
there trying to explain which Rorschach block they saw,
like no accuracy whatsoever.
The schizophrenic starts saying it
looks like a butterfly with a Van Dyke beard
and ears on fire, and the parents pull out
the right one instantly.
It works in the opposite direction
as well, where the parents are the ones trying
to describe the Rorschach test.
It only works within families.
The parents of the schizophrenic are no better at chance
when doing it with someone else's
child of a schizophrenic.
There seems to be this going on.
Logical interpretation, this has nothing
to do with the emergence of schizophrenia.
This is an obvious compensation.
You have a child, you have a sibling who
is this thought disordered, and there's
going to be a whole lot more adventurous communication
in the family to try to compensate for it.
Few other things in terms of early experience, and this
is a whole other domain of the disease,
which is being exposed to all sorts of infectious thingies.
And this is a really interesting provocative literature
floating around.
There's a far higher than expected chance
rate of schizophrenics whose mothers were exposed
to a number of different viruses in third trimester
of pregnancy.
Ah, some sort perinatal stressor,
pathogenic challenge to the system.
And when you look at the genomes of schizophrenics,
they have much higher than expected rate of viral DNA
that has been inserted in there, things called retroviruses.
Technical matters don't matter.
The main thing is more evidence of higher exposure
to viral pathogens, an elevated history
of neonatal viral infections.
And then, the cruelest one of all,
which has to do with a protozoan parasite,
not a virus or bacteria, but this protozoa
called Toxoplasma gondii.
And not Gandhi in the Gandhian sense, but probably
because it's even pronounced differently.
How are you pronouncing it these days?
Gondii.
Gondii.
Gondii, because there's two Is at the end,
which the old Mahatma never quite came up with.
But this parasite manages to get more Is in there than he did.
So it's Toxoplasma gondii, as everybody knows.
Toxoplasma is interesting.
It has this interesting life cycle.
It reproduces in the gut of cats.
It comes out in cat feces, feces are eaten by rodents.
Now in rodents, and toxo's evolutionary challenge
has been to figure out how to get
rodents inside cats stomachs.
And toxo does this amazing thing, which
my lab is doing some work on, including Patrick,
and looking at the thing that toxo does
is it makes rats begin to like the smell of cats, and to go up
and check it out.
And soon, you are inside the stomach of the cat
and completing toxo's life cycle.
How it does it is incredibly interesting
and slowly emerging.
So what's going on with toxo in humans,
people who are infected with toxo
have a higher than expected rate of mild neuropsychological
disinhibition, a little bit of problems
with frontal regulation of behavior,
higher than expected rates of serious car accidents,
higher than expected rates for the same degree of depression,
of attempting suicide, a picture of a certain degree
of impulsivity.
Not big effects, but, nonetheless, it pops up there.
But parallel with that, from day one,
there's also been a literature showing that Toxoplasma
exposure increases the risk of schizophrenia.
Individuals whose mothers were exposed to toxo
during pregnancy or looking at schizophrenics
and looking in their blood and seeing higher
than anticipated levels of antibodies against Toxoplasma,
evidence of this whole world of a connection between cats
and schizophrenia, and all sorts of hints
there, very, very slowly emerging field.
It is a real finding and it is a well-replicated one.
There's some connection there.
So where does these genes having to do with immune function
come in?
Maybe this is pertinent to this world
of viral correlates of schizophrenia, parasitic ones.
Nobody knows.
Finally, what have we got?
This challenge that we're going to have with-- when you read
the depression chapter, all of that,
is how do you put these pieces together.
How do you put together adolescent stress
with prenatal viruses with enlarged ventricles,
with funny genetic abnormalities here?
There isn't a very good integrated model
at this point to how to put the pieces together.
The field has not gotten that far.
So we're talking about genetic abnormalities, blah, blah,
all of that.
And thus, you know, our final box
has to be the evolution of schizophrenia.
Where did schizophrenia evolve from?
First question you would ask is, well, do you see something
like schizophrenia in other species.
And you don't.
You look at complex primates and you
see things that look like depression,
you see reactive depression, you see melancholia,
you see, in some cases, depression so severe
as to prove fatal.
You don't see animals having to loose associations
with proverbs, and concrete thought, and delusions,
and hallucinations.
Animals that start acting schizophrenic
get eaten that evening.
So there's not a whole lot of insight
from the zoological world.
There's not any animal precedents for schizophrenia.
So how about in humans?
How did schizophrenia evolve?
We are now back to one of our first lectures.
Why did giraffes have long necks?
Because it's a good thing that allows
them to pass on more copies of their genes,
because it's an adaptive trait.
By the rules of Darwin, schizophrenia is maladaptive.
Schizophrenics have a lower reproductive rate
than their unaffected siblings.
By the math, that is thus a trait
that should be being selected against.
Yet, schizophrenia persists at this 1% to 2% in every culture
out there.
Historical records indicate things
that convincingly sound like schizophrenia
have been there forever.
And, thus, one has to bring up the question that always lurks
in a scenario like this, which is are there circumstances
where schizophrenia is in fact adaptive, where
it is advantageous, where it increases
one's reproductive success.
The only domain where that has had any evidence
at all in the literature is schizophrenics
appear to have a lower incidence of certain types of cancers,
in particular, lung and throat, esophageal cancers.
And that's after controlling for smoking rates, all of that.
Not a big effect, but that causes people
to mumble something about maybe schizophrenia
was selected for its anti-cancer properties in the disease,
and balanced selection, all of that.
However, there is another possible adaptive thing
that's lurking around in there, something
which causes some of these traits
to not only no longer be maladaptive,
but to be wildly useful in certain contexts
of human society.
And what you'll see is it's not full-blown schizophrenia,
it's the milder versions that you
see in some of the relatives.
 OK.
Good.
Thank you for notching me once more.
OK.
So various organizational things, now that
we are here in the last gasp.
One thing is, make sure you go online,
fill out the online evaluations.
The other various review stuff.
The TA's are giving a review tomorrow from dawn until 3:30.
What time are you guys starting?
1:30.
1:30 to 3:30.
Where?
321.
321.
OK.
Read it on the board, unlike me.
I will pick up on office hours, then, from 3:30 to 6:00.
And operators will be standing by overnight.
But I think that's the preparative stuff.
Let's see.
Before starting this last lecture,
something that absolutely has to be done
is to once again emphasize what an amazing bunch of TA's you
guys lucked out in having.
I've been doing this class for hundreds of years,
and these guys are peerless.
So thank them.
They have been amazing in every regard.
[APPLAUSE]
[SHOUTS]
OK.
I guess this needs to be notched down.
So we start off.
Thank you guys.
You really were amazing.
So starting off.
What's a lot of what we have been doing for the last 30
lectures or whatever it is here?
We've often been wrestling with a behavior occurs,
an interesting behavior, a social behavior,
an abnormal behavior, destructive one.
A behavior occurs, and obviously our centerpiece
throughout has been, why did it happen?
And all of our buckets, and our buckets
that we have magically evaporated.
And at the core, over and over with the why did this happen,
is another question that lurks through there, simply
because very often, we are not asking
why did this behavior occur, some human social behavior that
is completely benign, but often some fairly disastrous ones.
Why did this behavior occur?
Very often what is between the lines
there is, whose fault is it?
Whose fault is it that this abnormal behavior occurred?
And where that immediately barrels us into
is back to the frontal cortical sections of earlier lectures,
that whole business of volition and culpability and-- God
help me for saying the phrase again
the first time since the first lecture-- free will, things
of that sort.
Quick survey.
How many of you are finishing the class
less wedded to the notion of free will
than when you started?
OK.
More so?
No change whatsoever?
What did I say?
Can you repeat that?
Hands up.
OK.
So a number of you.
And ultimately, this material-- no single factoid,
but I think all of it together-- is a hugely complicating issue
for notions of free will, for notions of vulnerability,
for notions of culpability, all of that
built around this question often lurking between the lines,
which is, why did that behavior occur?
Whose fault is it?
As a boring subset of that one is,
why did this behavior occur?
Who is worthy of praise for it?
That one is ultimately equally interesting, but probably less
pressing in society.
But where are these behaviors coming from?
And we've gotten really good at doing
some moderately sophisticated things
in dealing with the answer to a question like these.
And a great example of that is with epilepsy.
500 years ago, if you had an epileptic seizure,
where is this behavior coming from was absolutely clear,
which was demonic possession of some sort or other,
a staggering, heartbreaking literature
of the history of treatments of epileptics
and the response to epilepsy.
If in the process of somebody having a seizure 500 years ago,
they flung their arms around and struck
somebody else in the process, it would
be considered some version of assault and battery,
in most of Western European countries,
again, explained with a demonic underpinning.
And we're in a different position now.
If today somebody has a seizure and in the process,
they strike and break something, they're
not to be held legally responsible for if they
strike somebody.
That is not assault and battery.
It is a ludicrous idea, because somewhere around 1900 or so,
most people in this country got trained
with a thought, an explanation, a
where did this behavior come from that
is as defining of everything that is good about our culture
world.
Most people got to think the following thing.
It's not him, it's his disease.
And that is a huge landmark transition from 500 years ago,
people being burnt at the stake with some really
bad attribution given to us having the capacity to draw
an absolute line between the essence of who that person is
and the action potential storms that happen every now and then.
It's not him, it's his disease.
We're spectacular at doing something
like that with epilepsy.
We are lousy at doing it in all sorts of other domains.
One example, schizophrenia.
Back to schizophrenia again, and the abnormal behaviors of it,
and the occasional violence associated with it, lower than
in non-schizophrenia people, but the occasional violence
and, of course, the classic case again,
that guy John Hinckley trying to kill Reagan in the 1980s.
Paranoid schizophrenic, floridly so, and that very wise
jury of, in retrospect, some remarkably unsophisticated
people deciding, it's not him, it's his disease,
and put him in a psychiatric hospital.
And the apoplexy that went through this country
in response to with the editorials,
the senatorial bloviating crap about,
he's getting away with this, he's getting away,
he is responsible, showing an utterly limited ability
for people in this country, and some extremely powerful ones,
to draw a line between the essence of who this John
Hinckley is and the dopamine abnormalities in his brain.
And we have trouble drawing that line as well, doe example,
in the realm of parents and teachers
and guidance counselors making sense
of the biology of learning disabilities,
the biology of dyslexias, and a whole world of people not very
good yet at drawing a line between that and the person.
And instead, out come concepts like lazy and stupid and things
of that sort that have a long, long well-maintained
in the history of education in this country.
And a lot of people in positions of power, parents et al, still
have not gotten very good at drawing
the line between the essence of who that person is
and the biological constraints that
are superimposed on top of it.
What you begin to see after a while is something very
interesting, which is going to be one
of the main points of this last structure, which
is, as more and more information in this world
of behavioral social biology, whatever it is we're
calling this, as more and more of this has occurred,
as we get more and more domains where we have to at least begin
to consider there's a line in between the essence of
and the abnormalities of-- at some point,
this is going to stop being the biology of them
and their disorders and is going to be the biology of us.
And when things get really close to home
at that point, that's where a lot of people
get very, very anxious and very skittish about,
essentially, the punchline from a class
like this, the transition from them
and their existing in a different category
with a boundary, with a bucket, versus the rest of.
Us as it gets closer and closer to home,
the transition from them and disease to us
and individual differences and quirks and idiosyncrasies,
and a biology that is just as much of a biology as them
and their diseases, where the subtleties come in.
And where there has to have been that case, sort of that sense
challenging, is looking at some of the subtle neuropsychiatric
disorders that we have in the class, a few of which
I'll go over again here, but a few new ones,
where over and over it's the theme of,
there's not that much difference between me and them.
I imagine exactly what the continuum is.
It is not clear whatsoever where the line should be drawn,
the new category of normal versus abnormal.
Case after case of this.
One obvious one most recently emphasized,
schizotypalism, schizotypal personality disorder.
And when you look at the range of symptoms,
this is not a psychiatric disorder.
This really is not, and justifies the transition
to schizotypal personality, rather than a disorder.
It isn't a psychiatric disease to consult astrologers.
It isn't a psychiatric disease to go to Star Trek conventions.
It isn't any of these things.
It is one extreme in one axis of human behavior,
and it is one where, by definition, we're
beginning to sense the biology of it lurking around out there.
We know it's got something to do with the same genetics
that you find in the fuller loaded version in schizophrenia
itself.
We could begin to imagine that this is the biology of us
and some of our quirky obsessions,
versus them and their schizophrenia.
More examples.
We endlessly heard about the frontal lobe in this class,
and we heard about the boring, easy examples, when
it is blown out of the water, when
you have Phineas Gage, when you have frontally
damaged disinhibited murderers.
We've heard all about those, and those are the easy ones.
Those are not so easy if the vast majority of states in this
country cannot deal with the notion at a criminal trial that
somebody with no frontal cortex is not a biologically normal
human.
But nonetheless, that's relatively easy
compared to the issue that we really
have to think about, which is, the person sitting next to you
has a different frontal cortex than you do.
And you, by now, can come up-- yes,
it's the person on the left, seeing
sort of where the eyes are shifting--
and coming up with this obvious fact
that this makes a difference.
This makes a difference not in explaining why one person here
might be a serial murderer and the next person not, but just,
who's got it together with the studying?
Who's going to do an all-nighter Thursday night?
Who has what sort of personality?
Who is too shy to say something or other?
Who's the one who is always the first to say--
and this world of individual differences.
And you have no shortage by now of ways in which that
may manifest itself.
How many neurons and how many synapses
and what sort of receptors and all of that?
You could go on all week long as to the possible underpinnings
of that, and you could go on all week
long as to what events-- genetic, prenatal, et cetera--
might have brought that about.
But the whole critical thing there
is the transition from them and their brains
with no frontal cortex left to making sense of the fact
that all of us with perfectly normal frontal cortices
nonetheless all have different ones.
And at some point, this transition
brings the term frontal, frontal disinhibition, out
of the realm of pathology.
I mean, a great example of this--
in terms of how commonplace this now
is among of biological psychiatry types-- you'll
be at some conference, and some poor, quivering grad student
gets up to give a short talk.
And this is the first talk the person ever gave,
and they're obviously like a total nervous wreck,
and they manage to sort of limp through the end,
and they're a sopping rag at the end there, but they've done OK.
And then some total jerk big shot in the field
gets up from the back row and savages the guy,
and gets him on stupid statistics, minutiae,
and chest thumps and attacks his enemies
and yells at him for not citing, and going on and on.
And somebody is going to lean over
to somebody else in the audience,
and referring to the guy back, saying, jesus,
he is getting more frontal every day.
And that may not just be a metaphor.
That may be a way of hinting at the biology that is absolutely
there.
Why?
Some of us do some things like that, and some of us
would die rather than be that forward or that disinhibited,
those individual differences.
And we surely know they are there,
and we're beginning to understand the baby
steps of different versions of dopamine receptors
in the frontal cortex, that whole world of transitioning
from them and the front of their head blown out of the water
to us and our individual differences.
Another domain of this, another realm of insight, and that's
this disease Huntington's Disease.
And you will perhaps recall back to the very first class,
making reference to what turned out to be Huntington's, what is
very often the profile of somebody with Huntington's.
Middle aged guy suddenly starts behaving
in some outrageous way, disinhibited, all of that,
that whole business of, there's behavioral features
to this disease.
Huntington's Disease is a neurological disorder.
Huntington's Chorea-- the term chorea, choreography,
body movement, Huntington's uncontrolled writhing
that eventually consumes the entire body 24/7.
The person eventually, not so long,
soon, dies from choking to death on their saliva
because their muscles aren't coordinated any more.
Totally horrile neurological disease.
But what has taken people years is
to realize that that's not what Huntington's looks like
at the beginning.
And instead it's the profile, the scenario that I gave
in the very first class, again.
Middle aged guy, happy marriage, in the suburbs,
jobs, 2.73 kids and dogs, all of that sort of thing.
And the one day he suddenly punches somebody at work.
Then the wife discovers he's having an affair with whoever.
Then he gets arrested for brawling drunkenly in a bar
and he never used to drink.
And then he embezzles all the funds from work
and disappears forever, until a year or two later, when
he shows up in a neurology ward at the other end of the country
because he's getting tremors.
And what people have now figured out
is, two or three years before Huntington's is
a neurological disorder of movement,
it's a psychiatric disorder of disinhibition,
and is one where you begin to see
a behavioral profile like this.
And what you see is, by the time you've
got early stage Huntington's patients
when they're hospitalized, they are
famous for coming on to the staffers
or showing up in the day room without their pajama bottoms,
or just famous for doing stuff like that,
the disinhibited behavior of Huntington's patients.
And what's remarkable there is, people have known
for a long time what the neuropathology is
of Huntington's, Huntington's, the movement disorder.
And it's the disintegration of some motor
pathways in the brain.
Now that people have genetic markers for the disease,
know with some likelihood who's going to get it when, what's
become apparent now is, two or three years before you start
getting damage in the part of the brain
having to do with motor control, you get damage
in the frontal cortex.
Huntington's is initially a disease
of frontal cortical degradation.
And what is remarkable about that is,
this is a genetic disorder which immediately barrels us
into the, this a maladaptive trait.
You are dead by the time you're 50 or so.
Our usual question, why is it evolving,
why is it being maintained in the population,
seeing a theme of a hidden benefit of Huntington's, which
is that disinhibited behavior a couple
of years before the neurological symptoms do you in.
During that time window, individuals
with Huntington's out-reproduce their unaffected siblings.
They become, among other things, sexually promiscuous,
and they pass on more copies of their genes.
And what you suddenly see at that point
is framed from the standpoint of arms
that won't stop moving-- we're talking neurology-- framed
from the standpoint of number of copies of genes.
This is an evolutionary advance.
This is something which behaviorally
increases reproductive success.
Onset is typically around age 40,
so catching it around that time, which is typically
around the point where reproductive activity--
reproduction goes down in humans.
So getting an extra little blip out there
from the standpoint of an evolutionary biologist,
this isn't a disease.
This is a great invention where the bill happens
to come a while later, but there is no free lunch.
And framed that way, this was a very different way
of thinking about this disease.
But what was most striking is, when you first hear about it
and somebody says, OK, what do you
think the causes of this behavior are?
What causes this?
And the ones that most readily come to mind
is, the guy's a jerk.
The guy's having a midlife crisis.
The guy's what, like, oh, no, it's
actually a single gene defect where
there's too many glutamines.
That, and it's a disease of a single gene goes wrong,
and out comes this.
And we need to consider is, there's
individual variation in aspects of that system
long, far outside the range of what would get a disease label.
And it doesn't take too much imagination, again,
to translate that into why the person sitting next to you
is a little more this way and a little less that way.
Just the same challenge for us going from them
to what makes us, us.
Next example.
Disease I've only briefly mentioned, I think, previously.
Tourette's disease.
Tourette's disease.
Everybody knows about Tourette's disease,
which is, it's this disease where
people curse uncontrollably.
Scatology.
Tourette's disease, that doesn't begin to
scratch the surface of what Tourette's is about.
With Tourette's, yes, you get that scatology.
You also get inappropriate gesturing, tics, facial tics,
gestures of all sorts, aggressive ones,
sexually inappropriate ones, all sorts of vocalizations,
barking sounds, animal sounds.
It is just a torrent of behaviors coming out.
Now the critical thing when looking at Tourette's is,
this is different from the inappropriate behavior
of somebody with frontal damage.
Frontal damage is closer to home.
Every single day, I would bet all of us
have thoughts that are boastful or lustfall or petulant
or whatever, where we would die if anybody
knew we were thinking that.
And damage the frontal cortex, and when you think it,
you say it.
It is not the secret desire of every Tourette's patient
to bark like a dog and make quacking sounds once
every seven seconds.
And finally, thanks to the damage of that disease,
they are disinhibited to do so.
This is an astonishingly clear example of a line between
the essence of who that person is and these weird hiccups
of the id that occur in the limbic system with Tourette's.
And again, in its milder form, it's not a disease.
It's individual variation.
Now remarkably with Tourette's, of course,
people are beginning to learn something
about the biology of it.
There's a genetic component.
It's probably not that strong.
Beginning to see brain imaging correlates of it.
One totally weird possible way to wind up with Tourette's, and
this is a brand new class of pediatric diseases called
PANDAS, PANDAS diseases, which stands
for-- do not write this down-- which stands for Pediatric
Autoimmune Neuropsychological Disorders Associated
with Streptococcus.
Here's what happens.
You have a three-year-old, four-year-old kid who gets
a strep infection and runs a high fever and winds up being
the one in 10,000 kids in this situation where something goes
wrong, recovers from the fever, everything is fine,
and then two weeks later explodes into tics
and obsessive patterns and Tourette's-like disinhibitions.
And where did this come from?
Totally paralyzing.
And none of the normal drugs work.
And suddenly someone stumbles on what does work.
You give the child a drug that suppresses their immune system.
Things go back to normal.
Then a couple years later, they have some other fever
and they spike a high fever, and two weeks later
they explode back into these tics,
these disinhibited behaviors, these obsessions, all of that.
What's going on?
What appears to be the case is in the subset of people
with a high fever, these kids, the blood brain barrier
opens up in a way that allows the immune system
to get to places in the brain where the immune system isn't
supposed to be.
And you form antibodies that attack
elements of your own brain, of your own central nervous
system.
And this is what turns out to be the case.
It appears to be, in some cases, an autoimmunie disorder,
the treatment being, give the person immune suppressants.
And when you look at adults with Tourette's disease or adults
with obsessive compulsive disorder,
they have far higher than expected
at chance levels appearance of antibodies in their bloodstream
against constituents of their nervous system.
And they have a higher than expected rate
of these childhood fevers.
The sort of stuff we've been getting throughout,
groping at these strange little pieces of making sense
of this stuff.
And have something like that, and you wind up with a disease
that has this bizarre array of symptoms that you see
in Tourette's.
And some years ago, I actually had somebody in this class who
had Tourette's.
And it wasn't bad.
He had like a few facial tic sorts of things.
And after the first couple of classes,
he came to office hours and was kind of describing
that he had Tourette's and he was very glad
that I was familiar with his disease,
and explaining that this was sort of something that
occasionally became disruptive in classes.
And if it would be possible, it might make sense
to have an exam in a sep-- and he spent the entire time
doing this.
This was the disease.
This was the essence of who he was.
And you could not ask for a clearer line.
Look at this.
500 years ago you have Tourette's disease.
It tends to have an adolescent onset of the symptoms.
It's got somewhat of a bias female to male ratio.
And certainly you've got a 13-year-old girl who suddenly
starts cursing uncontrollably with bizarre sexual references
or whatever.
And what's the only possible conclusion?
You've got someone possessed by the devil
who should be treated appropriately.
Look at where we've gotten to in 500 years.
We've gone from taking people like that
and burning them at the stake to letting them take
the MCATs in a different room from everyone
else so they don't disturb them with the barking.
We've gotten real good, with a disease like Tourette's,
of drawing the line over the disease and who the person is.
That's a realm where we've gotten a lot of progress.
More of these subtleties, again, what in some ways
was one of the most challenging pieces of the religion lecture,
making sense of have a brain that
has uncontrolled epileptic firing for a couple of minutes
once every six months, and you're much more interested
in the philosophy of religion, the temporal personality
business.
And again, that challenge of, most of us
have gotten to our religious stances
through a great deal of hard work and introspection.
And, even if only once in the history of the universe,
somebody instead has gotten there
because their neurons have synchronized firing
in their limbic systems once every six months,
that is very challenging to the sense of no longer talking
about them, and very challenging to the sense
of making sense of us as autonomous individuals
within our own control.
Other realms of this.
OCD.
Again, we've got some sense, after the last lecture,
of what it looks like and just how
incredibly, incredibly crippling it is in its extreme forms.
These people cannot leave their homes.
These people cannot function.
They most certainly cannot hold down jobs.
It is just as destructive of a disease, in its worst forms,
as is schizophrenia.
And people are beginning to learn something
about the biology of it, that link
to childhood high fevers and strep infection.
Some evidence of genetic component to it.
There is first neuroimaging being done.
And you might remember that area of the brain, basal ganglia.
Or maybe not.
Have I actually mentioned basal ganglia,
or have I just wished to?
OK.
Basal ganglia.
Motor area.
What people are beginning to see is, in OCD,
put someone in a scanner, and there
is increased metabolic rate in the basal ganglia,
this part of the brain involved in movement,
involved in making sense of the compulsions,
the need to tap a certain number of times, the need
to arrange the utensils so that they are perfectly parallel.
The need to-- it's like there's an itch in the motoric systems
there.
And people are beginning to understand that one.
Take somebody with OCD and treat them successfully.
It's typically with SSRI's, serotonin uptake inhibitors,
which also work for aspects of depression.
Treat someone effectively, and the metabolic rate
in the basal ganglia goes back down to normal.
The pieces begin to fit there.
Getting into even stranger realms--
because these diseases, by now, have mostly even passed
the disease of the month TV special,
they are becoming to be understood so well.
Then there's a whole world out there
of the most bizarre possible diseases you can imagine.
Here's one of my favorite ones.
It's called Jerusalem Syndrome.
This one is great.
This is such a bizarre disease.
Jerusalem Syndrome.
Shockingly, you can only get through Jerusalem Syndrome
in Jerusalem.
Here's what you get.
It's gotten to be a rule-out.
The person who gets it cannot have problems with depression
or anxiety.
Rule out all the other psychiatric disorders.
It's a standalone diagnosis.
Here's the sort of person who gets Jerusalem Syndrome.
An American, highly religious Southern Baptist
on their first trip ever to the Holy Land.
Two other requirements that virtually
are in every single case.
The person has to be relatively on their own.
At the end of the day, they are in a room by themselves,
and they have to be having huge problems with the jet lag.
In other words, they're up at all sorts
of weird times of day, and really
in soggy shape because of that.
Here's what happens.
This is the person who's been waiting their entire life
to finally come to the Holy Land, has been saving,
has been whatever.
They scrape together.
They go there.
This will be the land where Christ walked.
And they get there and they see that Jerusalem
is like a normal city.
There's traffic jams, there's smog, there's noise,
there's pickpockets, there's McDonald's.
There's all of that, and they're disappointed.
They are shattered by this.
And something comes unhinged, and something
comes unhinged in the middle of the night there.
They're not being able to sleep alone in that room,
dealing with this shocking realization
that the place they had dreamt of their entire life
doesn't exist anymore.
And something cracks.
Here's the detail that I love.
In every single one of these cases,
the person rips apart the hotel room bed,
shreds the-- not the mattress, the sheet-- shreds the sheet,
takes their clothes off, and before you know it,
they're on a street corner in Jerusalem
dressed in a toga preaching to everyone,
telling them to go back to simpler ways.
The psychiatry SWAT team from the hospital
there shows up, takes the person,
puts him in the hospital there for a couple of days or so.
Their head clears.
Ships them back to Biloxi or wherever,
and they never have a problem with this
again for the rest of their life.
They get 50 cases of this a year in Jerusalem.
This is a recognized syndrome.
People publish papers about Jerusalem Syndrome.
It struck me, though, that there is actually
a very easy cure for it, which is, in Jerusalem, in all
the hotel rooms, if the sheets always were plaid or something.
Something about the white just begs to be pulled into a toga,
and that sort of pushes them over the edge.
But this is a real disease.
More of these.
Stendhal's disease.
Stendhal disease you can only get in its official
form in the city of Florence.
And Stendhal, the well-known-- what
was he, a philosopher or writer or hockey player?
Writer.
Yes, the well-known writer, thank you, Stendhal,
who, describing the first time he came to Florence,
and this sense of vertigo and nausea
and complete loss of control that
came from seeing one too many amazing, priceless, unmatchable
frescoes, where you get into a manic state from it
and you can't take it anymore.
And you come out running like a wild boar
through the streets of Florence.
This occurs with some regularity there,
and this is termed Stendhal Syndrome.
There are papers written about the subject.
More of these.
Then there is a disease which, trichotillomania--
these impossible-to-pronounce ones,
people who eat hair, people who eat hair obsessively.
Not just the anxious version, sometimes,
of somebody who's kind of like chewing their hair when they're
sort of anxious.
But instead this is where a person is pulling hair off
of their brush in order to eat it.
They go over to someone's house and they go to the bathroom
and open up and find the brushes and the combs
there to pull the hair off.
This is an incredibly disturbed disease, where at an extreme,
you get somebody who has consumed so much hair that it
forms a hairball.
It blocks their stomach, and this is life-threatening.
It forms a plug of hair with a long strand
of it coming up the esophagus.
And this is life-threatening.
And you have to take it out surgically.
And it's this whole clot of hair with this thing that
was going up in the esophagus.
And what is this disease called?
It's called Rapunzel's Syndrome because
of the long stretch of hair.
How weird is that?
What is that about?
Just imagine we start with one of our charts here,
and we say, steals hair from friends' bathroom brushes,
and sort of say, try to do that one of working our way
backwards of what happened the second before,
to evolution of whatever.
How bizarre is that?
That's like nothing compared to the next two diseases,
that are so hard to pronounce I'm not even
going to attempt to.
Actually the first disease is pretty run of the mill
and pretty straightforward.
The first of these is merely the disease
of people who can only become sexually aroused by amputees.
Whoah.
OK.
That's a little bit peculiar.
That makes like the person with it seem like the kid
next door compared to this one.
This is the disease of someone who
has a body dimorphism image.
It's a body integrative disorder.
This is someone who, their entire life,
has believed they are meant to have a limb missing.
Their sense of themselves involve them being an amputee.
This is a real disease.
This is a real disease where people have websites
where they communicate with each other about how
to have industrial accidents, accidents
that will remove a limb, where it will look like an accident.
There are secret physicians who will do this.
There was a paper in a neuroethics journal
a couple of years ago by a physician arguing
that one should be willing to carry out
the surgery on a person who wants this done,
because they will find a way to do it disastrously otherwise.
As termed by the person who first described it,
this is a new way of being mad.
And this is terrain like you cannot imagine.
Finally, most shocking of all, this
was a case report a couple years ago of somebody
who had stroke damage to the cortical area
towards the frontal cortex, but also a little bit in one
other area.
And as the case report described,
this person, in the aftermath, became
obsessed with polka music.
Polka music.
This was like some gang member Hell's Angel guy
who had, like, brain damage after one brawl too many.
And out the other end, this is someone
who's willing to slash you to bits if you disagree with which
is the best polka group coming out of Krakow these days,
or some such thing.
The person spent a dozen hours a day listening to polka music.
What the hell is with that?
what?
Damage there?
We're just seeing these totally bizarre ways
in which things can go wrong.
Things can go wrong in merely peculiar ways.
Things can go wrong in ways that destroy people's lives.
So what are we to make of things like this?
This whole world of these subtle neuropsychiatric disorders
where, with each one of them, it's easier and easier
to imagine how it translates into not them
and their disease, but our individual differences.
One thing to appreciate is that the majority
of these that fall in this category, they
didn't even have names 50 years ago.
There wasn't a way of describing, or even imagining,
that biology could go wrong in this particular way.
And there weren't even names for those.
Most of these didn't have names 10 years ago.
And what's obvious then is, there's
no way the science is going to stop.
Just more and more of these names
are going to appear, more and more of these syndromes
and disorders.
And at some point, every single one of us
is going to have two or three of those labels.
And what happens at that point, because this
is describing a very close array of
human individual variability.
I do not have OCD.
But I will count stairs on occasion.
I, during periods of anxiety, will do that.
Obviously I have only one clothing style
for the last 10 weeks.
Every day, coming here, I go through the same sort
of rehearsal saying, I am not going
to start off the lecture today by saying, OK, let's get going.
And then I've done it again.
And I don't have OCD.
I have that weird, weird compulsive behavior,
or ritualistic ones.
Obsessional.
OK.
Here's what I've been wasting most of today thinking about.
I have a grant due next week, and I'm
getting so little done on it that I'm
beginning to get anxious.
So I've been having this whole repeated
pattern of this intrusive force thinking about, Charlie Bit Me.
So I think about Charlie Bit Me.
Then I think, this can't be for real.
They had to have had professional actors.
Then I think, that's not possible.
There's no way you can get a baby
to bite the finger that way.
Then I think, if this was actually staged,
I am deeply hurt by the YouTube people.
Then I think about how his accent
sounds when he says Charlie.
Then I realize I'm moving my lips.
Then I say, OK, you got a grant due.
Stop screwing around already.
Whoah, Charlie Bit Me.
What a cool video.
I wonder if they staged it.
This has been going on for all of today.
This is not OCD, but it's elements of.
And just as every one of us has elements
of some of these, where all of these individual differences
come in.
And at some point we will have to deal with the fact
that the same exact biology, writ large, that
may make somebody a schizophrenic in a milder form,
will have them being very interested
in metamagical issues, and in the mildest form allows
you to have a fantasy while standing on line
in the supermarket.
It's the same biology on the same continuum.
And somewhere in there it stops being them and their diseases
and becomes us and who we are.
So one of the challenges with that
is, what's going to happen as we get
more and more of these names that describes us more
and more, and we understand the neurotransmitters
and the early experience and the genes and all the last 10
weeks.
And as we understand more and more of that,
something often happens at that point,
which is, people begin to get real uncomfortable, real sense
of being threatened.
For this tremendous fear that what
if those scientists accidentally go and explain everything
when we're beginning to see biologies of tastes
and religion and who likes risk and who
is capable of being faithful and who is not,
and who has-- and this realm with individual differences,
and begin to see the machinery underneath.
Lots of people get uncomfortable at that point,
because it challenges one of the pretenses that we all,
virtually all, desperately cherish,
which is the notion that we are utterly, utterly unique,
that each one of us is this flame of individuality that
cannot be captured, that cannot be constrained,
that defines us, this individuality that is just
bubbling away there.
And there go those scientists learning more and more
about less and less.
And they may mess that up.
They may wipe out that sense of our uniqueness.
And that worry was perfectly encapsulated.
This famous story, science fiction story,
by Arthur C. Clarke called The Nine Billion Names of God.
Wonderful metaphor for this.
This is a bunch of Tibetan monks,
and apparently in some branch of Tibetan Buddhism,
there is a belief that God has nine billion names,
an obvious metaphor for the unknowable, the unattainable.
And in this story, these monks team up
with a bunch of computer scientists
with the greatest computer around that
they program to start printing out the names of God.
And what happens in the story is, as it's cranking through
and it is going to name the nine billion names of God,
as it cranks through this, as each new name comes out,
one of the stars in the sky goes dark.
And that's a perfect metaphor for this fear that people have,
which is, if inadvertently scientists go and learn
everything with each new soulless factoid that turns us
just into a bunch of equations or biochemical pathways,
that with each new factoid, one of the stars in the sky
will go dark as we lose some of our individuality,
as we lose some of what makes us who we are.
There is no reason to worry about this,
and this is for two reasons.
First off, even if scientists went and inadvertently
explained everything, that still would not
take away the wonder of it.
You can take a gazelle leaping and turn it
into a whole bunch of biomechanical equations.
You could turn Bach into Kontrapunkt Rules,
and that does not in the slightest change,
or should not in the slightest change, our capacity
to be moved intensely by them.
And there's no reason why something should lose its power
simply because it turns out to have layers of complexity that
were not initially available to us, which we slowly attain.
It should not destroy that sense in the slightest.
The second reason why this isn't something to worry about
is, scientists are never going to inadvertently go and explain
everything about everything, because we've
seen throughout the class over and over
and over again, every time one question gets answered,
10 more get generated, half a dozen
of which are much more interesting
questions than you started off with.
It is a fractal.
It is an infinite fractal of knowledge to be attained.
They're never going to go and inadvertently explain
everything.
Wonderful quote from the geneticist
Haldane-- he's the one who came up with two brothers
are eight cousinss-- another one of these,
where he once said, "Life is not only stranger than we imagine.
Life is stranger than we can imagine."
Scientists are never going to inadvertently go and explain
everything.
The purpose of science is not to cure us of a sense of mystery.
The purpose of science is to constantly reinvent it.
So that's one realm in which people are threatened
by all the sorts of knowledge and where
this is going in terms of describing the what makes us
who we are.
There is another realm, not just the,
what happens to our sense of selfness, another realm of,
what does society do with this?
What does society do as we get more and more of these terms
and we understand more and more where the gears are,
where the controls are, where the challenges are
to the sense of autonomy and agency in people?
What's going to happen at that point?
What's clear is, if you are poor or poorly connected,
you are screwed, because as more and more of these labels
are given out, that's just the excuse that's
needed to deny you a job or health care or fair housing.
That is clearly an enormous danger with knowledge of this.
But hopefully what happens instead,
on a more optimistic note, is somewhere in all these continua
that this class was about, you see, there
but for the grace of God, and a couple of neurotransmitters
and three or four more receptors, could go I,
as you begin to see a continua as you
begin to see all sorts of realms that are tragically
done in biology.
We have no trouble looking at a schizophrenic and seeing,
this is a disease, and this is someone
who needs our care and forgiveness and protection.
And we are in a world now where people who obsessively count
numbers eight hours a day, we will
have to be able to view that as just as much a disease that
is just as much deserving of care and protection
and understanding.
With any luck, what all this knowledge is going to do
is force us to extend an umbrella of protection,
a realm of empathy, into areas we
could never have dreamt of before,
but never have dreamt of.
The same exact extent that if you
took the wisest, most compassionate,
most introspective person on earth from 500 years ago
and told them epilepsy is a disease,
it would have made no sense at all.
And we are certainly sitting here
with a whole world of things where
it could make no sense to us at all, where we will come
to see that it has biological components as strongly as any
of these others.
And we will have this challenge of seeing
that this is a realm not of judgement, but of protection.
And when we reach that point, we will
have discovered that when we describe somebody
as being healthy, when we say we are healthy, what we are really
saying is, we merely have the same diseases that everybody
else does.
And with any luck, out of this will come
a great deal of compassion.
OK.
So that's where all of this may play out
in terms of the challenge to people's
sense of individuality, what society
should do with knowledge like this as it emerges.
What's probably most important is
what all this stuff means in terms of impacting you
and your interactions in society,
and what you will wind up doing.
One of the irritating themes, probably
the most irritating concept in this whole course,
is the one of modulation, these stupid if-then clauses,
because what they say over and over
and over again is, just when you think you've figured out
what is causing behavior, oh no, it's not actually causing it,
it is amplifying the preexisting tendency of this
or damping or modulating or imposing a contingent clause.
Doesn't anything cause anything?
It's like the entire point of this class
that nothing ever actually starts a behavior.
Everything is modulating, so you could never figure out
how stuff is actually working.
Why does this have to be so complicated?
And one thing that comes out of the,
why does this have to be so complicated
is, why does it have to be so difficult to do something
helpful, then in any of these realms?
And I know for a fact that a large majority of you
have the desire to do that, figuring in some of the things
you want to do with the rest of your life.
And what is really easy is to come out
of a course like this saying, it's
really impossible to change anything
because it is so incredibly complex.
It is really hard to do it because
of how complicated it is.
But it's not impossible.
It's really hard to do it because it
will require not only doing vast amounts of work
of collecting vast amounts of information,
but then trying to synthesize it and trying
to intuit when you should stop paying attention
to the vast amounts of information.
It is doable, but it will be incredibly hard,
because down the line, every time one of you guys
will choose to try to do something
with a level of excellence that comes to people here very
easily, every time you choose to do something,
you are facto saying no to 20 other things.
And some of those other things will be very, very important
things to you.
And those are tough choices to make.
And it will be doable but hard because something
that's probably utterly inconceivable to you guys,
but which is, at some point you're going to get tired.
And it gets a lot harder to try to turn all of this
into how can you make things better.
But you guys need to do that.
Here's a story.
And this was about my father.
My father was an architect, an architectural historian.
And part of his career he taught in NYU, but McCarthy Era.
Things didn't work out, and he wound up teaching
in this crappy little architectural night
school in Brooklyn for years and years on end.
This was as flea-bitten of a place as you can possibly get.
And every now and then I would go to see a lecture of his.
And he was a spectacular lecturer.
And he would do this thing.
One of the lecturers, he's in there
and he's putting up pictures of the most beautiful, important
buildings on earth, and Versailles
and the pyramids of Giza, and this or that incredible palace,
and all of that.
And here's these guys sitting in this night school who
are, like, working as draftsmen during the day,
and this is really a ragtag bunch,
and putting up these pictures of the most beautiful archi--
and you know exactly what it is to inspire these people,
to move to the grid.
And no, that's not what he's doing.
He's putting up these pictures, and he's
yelling at these people saying, for too long architects have
been whores of the wealthy.
What they do is we build their palaces,
we build their mausoleums, we build their forts.
And there's Versailles and there's the Giza and all.
And I do not want to see you being the whores of the wealthy
and the whores of the powerful.
You are to-- and he's yelling at them.
He's yelling at them about this.
And these are folks who they're going
to be lucky if they do, like, illegal garage
extensions in Canarsie in Brooklyn someday.
And he's yelling at them about this.
And I'm sitting there thinking, this
is the stupidest thing I've ever seen.
And it took some time to realize that no, in fact,
this was not at all stupid.
And in fact, this was something remarkably respectful
he was doing, because he was saying to them,
you have the capacity to sin.
You have the capacity to do wrong.
And implicit in granting the power to people like that,
and also intrinsic in that is, thus
you have the capacity to attain a state of grace
through the work that you will do.
Great other story, Robert Oppenheimer,
when the first atomic bomb was tested, and went off,
made an amazing statement, which is "Now
even physics knows sin." and the statement there being
that even something as abstract as physics
can, on some metaphorical, some secular level, know sin.
Even within the realm of putting together buildings,
if you do it toadying for the wrong people,
this could count as a state of sinning,
and intrinsic in that is the possibility
of a state of grace, even in worlds like being a physicist
or being an architect.
It's not hard to see that one for you guys,
though, because of who you all are.
All of you here are privileged.
You are powerful.
You will have powerful resources and connections
your entire life.
And it will constantly intersect with the last 10 weeks.
And it is guaranteed that some of you, at various points,
will have 30 seconds to decide with somebody in an ER
who has taken a vast amount of pills
to try to kill themselves.
You need to decide, is it them?
Is it their disease?
Is there even a boundary?
Do I give the command against their will
to have their stomach pumped?
Every one of you, at some point, will make decisions
about quality of life, if you go into medical professions,
as to when you pull a plug.
Almost certainly, some of you in here
will be judges someplace or other,
wrestling with some of the exact issues brought up.
Some of you in here will be legislators
deciding how money should be spent, what
things money is a waste on.
And you guys will be in positions like that,
because if anybody will wind up with those powers,
it will be guys.
And if you remember any of this stuff, what
will seem the easiest thing to remember
is, it's so complicated, it is impossible to fix anything.
It is impossible to make things better.
And so I want to finish the class with two final thoughts
here.
One is, even though it's complicated,
you've got to do something.
Wonderful, cool thing I heard about in archeology.
And I don't know if this is really true or urban legend.
But when you excavate a site, what you are supposed to do
is excavate only about half of it.
You leave the other half for the people
in the future with better techniques and better
understanding, and leave something
intact there to keep from your blundering hands.
And the next person who then excavates does only half,
and half at every juncture, saying,
leave the possibility that people will be thinking
very differently in the future.
Work with the possibility that some
of the things we feel certain about right now,
the smartest and most compassionate of people
500 years ago, felt that way about epilepsy or things
of that sort.
It's complicated.
Just because it's complicated, that's
not an excuse to do nothing.
If anybody is going to do it and make a difference,
it will be you guys.
The other final point is to do in one last dichotomy, one
last artificial bucket, one that runs through this business way
too often.
You don't have to choose between being compassionate and being
scientific.
So go and do both.
And good luck.